Radnički pokret: zbirka fotografija

Overall, the collection includes around 100 000 photos, 300 postcards

The History Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina aims to collect, preserve, explore, present, and promote the cultural and historical heritage of Bosnia and Herzegovina. From its founding in 1945 until 1993, the Museum remained thematically focused on the history of anti fascism during World War II and the cultivation of socialist state values. The name of the Museum, once Museum of the Revolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, has changed several times, but it has always been recognizable.

Systematic gathering of photos for the Museum collection as primary museum documents began with the foundation of the Museum in 1947. The collection of photographs has been created by systematic gathering: Gifts, purchase, storage, exchange with other institutions and collectors (such as the EU Commission on War Crimes, individuals, associations of veterans of World War II, military organizations and some brigades, participants in the National Struggle for Liberation and their descendants , as well as gifts and exchanges with museum institutions in Zagreb, Belgrade, and Novi Sad. The Museum also conducts fieldwork, collecting and systematically purchasing photographic material from private owners. Photographs in the Museum’s collections record details of the political, economic, and cultural life in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina. These photos are valuable testimony from BiH history which is unknown or not sufficiently known to the public. Today, the Collection of Photographs of the History Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina follows the course of history over the twentieth century to the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina (including the last war, 1992-1995). 
Photographic material held in the History Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina has the status of original museum objects, serves as an example of collection practices, and is also a vital part of BIH’s photographic heritage. The collection includes photographs by significant photographic names like Walter Tausch, Georges Skrigin, Jan Beran, Šefket Maglajlić, Aleksa Škrbo, Ferdo Winterfeld, Ron Haviv, and Danilo Krstanović. Postcards from the late 19th century until 1945 are a valuable part of this collection. The contents present Bosnian towns, folk costumes, portraits of important figures, and reproductions of works of art. This sub-collection consists of about 3000 postcards. 
The collection is relevant for the research of World War II in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and photographs in some cases depict Jewish-owned buildings, families, shops, etc.