Immigration files of Jews, Roma and Sinti, compiled by the Belgian Public Safety Office and its successor, the Belgian Aliens Police (Vreemdelingenpolitie - Police des Étrangers). Collection

over 920,000 digitised images (over 19,800 files)

This collection contains a selection of files compiled by the Belgian Aliens Police (Vreemdelingenpolitie - Police des Étrangers), relevant for research on the Holocaust in Belgium : the files of Jews, Roma and Sinti deported from the Dossin barracks, the files of Jews living in Belgium and deported from France, the files of Jewish armed resistance fighters, the files of Jewish members of hiding networks, the files of Jews detained at the Breendonk camp for political prisoners, and the files of Jews liberated at or released from the Dossin barracks. The information on the cover of each file refers to persons related to the foreigner : children, business associates, family members who lived in or passed through Belgium… The content of the files can be very diverse. In general, every file contains a questionnaire filled out by the foreigner upon arrival in Belgium, address changes, birth certificates, marriage certificates and death certificates (in case an immigrant passed away in Belgium). For many refugees from Nazi-Germany, the file also contains a political refugee questionnaire. In files created after 1914 photos are often inserted. In case a person was politically active and/or came in to contact with the police, the file might also contain police reports and correspondence with the police force at the last place of residence abroad. When a foreigner in Belgium married, the files of both partners were merged. When a child turned 15, his file was separated from that of his parents. A file was closed once all persons represented in the file were deceased, obtained Belgian nationality or had left the country. The search engine will produce relevant immigration files when searching for a name. The collection cannot be searched as a whole.