Ministerstvo financí - Londýn

24,85 linear metres from which are 16,5 linear metre processed and inventoried and 8,8 linear metres are unprocessed. The fonds is partially accessible.

The fonds was given into the State Central Archives (the National Archives) in 1968. It was divided in 167 boxes with the complete list of content but it wasn´t arranged. Later in 1969 it was organised according to: 1) subjects and 2) alphabetical set of key words. According to this inventory the fonds was divided into 132 boxes.

The Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile consisted of the President, the Goverment and the State Council (which should represented the Czechoslovak parliament) - Edvard Beneš the former President of the Czechoslovak Republic was accepted as the President of the Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile. The Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile consisted of 7 ministries: Ministry of the National Defence, Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry of Economic Recovery, Ministry of Agriculture.

The fonds consists of documents of the Czechoslovak Ministry of Finance in Exile which was established in 1940 and functioned to June 1945. In the fonds, there can be found also some files from activities of Czechoslovak National Committee in London and other Czechoslovak ministries in Exile.

The fonds consists of documents of Ministry of Finance activities - documents for preparing and compilation of the state budget, documents for payments of Czechoslovak military and civil authorities. There can be found documents from other financial matters such as checks, accounts, financial confirmations, contracts or travel expenses.

Documents that refer to jewish issue can be found in several boxes. The most important one might be the box n. 131, there are registers of Czechoslovak Jews (and other citizens) deported in to the Terezín ghetto and later in to the concentration camps in occupied Poland. There are also information about so-called "packet actions" in favor of deported Czechoslovak Jews.
Other relevant documents come generally from negotiations of the Czechoslovak authorities about evacuation of Czechoslovak Jews and their relatives from the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia.
There is a possibility that other files related to Czechoslovak Jews in this fonds can be found also in documents about repatriation or about issues of the property.