Norimberský soud, Norimberk

71 linear metres of documents, all are processed and inventoried and accessible.

The documents and files of this creator were stored at several Czechoslovak institutions. In 1956, they were transferred to the State Central Archives. During the archival processing in 1960-1961, documents were divided in two fonds: The Office of the Czechoslovak delegate in the Commission for Prosecution of War Criminals (http://www.badatelna.cz/fond/770) contains documents concerning the first Nuremberg trial as well as the administrative records of the office. This fonds – Nuremberg Trials – consists of stenographic records from 12 subsequent trials 1946 – 1949.

The Nuremberg trials were the series of military trials held for the prosecution of prominent Nazi leaders in Germany after the WWII. The first and most known trial of 24 “major war criminals” such as Martin Bormann, Hermann Göring or Rudolf Hess etc. was held before the International Military Tribunal from November 20, 1945 to October 1, 1946. This major trial was followed by 12 trials (known as subsequent Nuremberg trials) held before the U.S. Military Tribunals which tried Nazi leaders responsible for other economic, political and military matters of the Third Reich. 

The creator of the fonds, the Office of the Czechoslovak delegate in the United Nations Commission for Prosecution of War Criminals (from 1945 known as the Office of the Czechoslovak delegate at the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg) was founded in 1943 and its goal was to represent Czechoslovakia in the commission, to cooperate internationally on investigations and to take actions against war criminals from Czechoslovak point of view. In the same time, the office also reported back to the Czechoslovak government and to the Ministry of Interior and Justice (records of interrogations, records of judgements etc.). The office was cancelled in 1949 and the only Czechoslovak delegate who served as the head officer was Bohumil Ečer.

The fonds consists of stenographic records (250 000 pages) from each of 12 subsequent trials which were as copies submitted to all national delegations participating at the Nuremberg proceedings and investigation. The fonds also consists of several folders with various documents such as hearings of witnesses or given judgements etc. 

The 12 subsequent trials were: the Doctors' Trial (against 23 medical doctors), the Milch Trial (against the Field Marshal Erhard Milch), the Judges' Trial (against 16 jurists and lawyers), the Pohl Trial (also known as Economics and Administrative Departments of the SS trial against Oswald Pohl and 17 other SS officers), the Flick Trial (against Friedrich Flick and 5 top directors of the Flick Company group), the IG Farben Trial (against 23 top directors of the IG Farben group), the Hostages Trial (known also as the Southeast case against generals leading the Balkans campaign), the RuSHA Trial (against Ulrich Greifelt and 3 other officers of SS organizations), the Einsatzgruppen Trial (against 24 officers of SS mobile death squads), the Krupp Trial (against 12 former directors of the Krupp group), the Ministries Trial (known as the Wilhelmstrasse process or Weizsӓcker process), the High Command Trial (against 14 generals of Wehrmacht).