Ministerstvo hospodářské obnovy - Londýn

8,5 linear metres of documents from which all are processed and inventoried. The fonds is accessible.

Materials of this fonds were transferred to the State Central Archives (= National Archives) in 1961. The fonds was processed in 1962 and certain documents of another creator - the Ministery of Industry - were added to this fonds.

The Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile consisted of the President, the Goverment and the State Council (which should represented the Czechoslovak parliament) - Edvard Beneš the former President of the Czechoslovak Republic was accepted as the President of the Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile. The Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile consisted of 7 ministries: Ministry of the National Defence, Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Social Welfare, Ministry of Economic Recovery, Ministry of Agriculture.

The fonds consists of documents of the Czechoslovak Ministry of Economic Recovery in Exile which was established in 1941 and functioned to February 1945.

In the fonds, there are files from government meetings about post-war economic plans and works - such as ledgers, data used for preparations of the state budget, correspondence between departments, various economic reports for the Minister or memos. There are also documents related to post-war reconstruction plans (United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, UNRRA) such as documents of activities of each commissions (planning commission, industrial commission, medical commission...) and furthermore various statistics, files or newspapers.

The Jewish-related documents are not well specified in the Finding Aid, except of the box no. 22, there are files connected to the organization of The Union of Orthodox Jews. The documents have most likely an official character.
We can also assume that files related to the Czechoslovak Jews can be probably found in the boxes with documents of repatriation of the Czechoslovak citizens or in the folders of the Committee for Social Care.