Saksa fašistlike okupantide roimade ja nende poolt tekitatud kahjude kindlakstegemise ja uurimise Eesti Vabariiklik Komisjon

9 records in 2 series; original bound paper documents.

The Extraordinary State Commission worked in Estonia during 1944-1947. Reports and the major segment of documents from the Commission were sent to the Central Commission in Moscow. Part of the documentation was delivered to the Estonian History Museum in 1951; in 1962 the museum delivered a substantial part of the collection to the Estonian State Archive (Fonds ERA.R-364). A small part (9 records) of the collection remains in the Estonian History Museum.

This fonds contains a collection of documents from the Extraordinary State Commission of the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic for the Establishment and Investigation of Crimes and Damages Perpetrated by German-Fascist Invaders and Their Collaborators. This commission worked as sub-unit of the Extraordinary State Commission of the USSR in Soviet-occupied Estonia 1944-1947. 

The Extraordinary State Commission of the USSR (Russian: Чрезвычайная Государственная Комиссия / ChGK) was formed by the Soviet authorities; its official aim was "investigating and punishing the Crimes of the German-Fascist Aggressors" and their allies. The commission was established 1942 and had the responsibility to investigate the Nazi war crimes and collect materials which would confirm crimes and losses caused by the invaders. 

According to its own data, 32,000 organizational staff took part in the work of commission and around 7,000,000 Soviet citizens participated in collection of materials and evidence. The 27 reports of the Extraordinary State Commission were the majority of the Soviet evidentiary material in the Nuremberg proceedings and in the Japanese war criminal proceedings.

This archival fonds contains, in addition to documents from the Extraordinary State Commission, original documents from German authorities. Documents that are directly related to the Holocaust include original reports from SS camp doctor KZ Vaivara Franz von Bodmann from October 1943 until June 1944 (Der SS Lagerarzt K.L. Waiwara an das SS Wirtschafts- und Verwaltungshauptamt. Monatsberichte Oktober 1943 – June 1944). These reports present statistics and death rates of inmates in KZ Vaivara and subcamps (AM.D-152.2.40). Documents partially related to the Holocaust include original documents of the Tallinn Work and Education Camp (Arbeits- und Erziehungslager Tallinn (No. 1)), containing records of disciplinary punishments of inmates (including some Jews and Roma) (AM.D-152.2.39).