Archives du Comité international de la Croix-Rouge (ACICR): G44 Hostages and Political Detainees (microfilm)

16 reels

The series G44 conmprises dossiers produced by different commissions of the Secretary General of the International Committee of the Red Cross all of which were transferred to the central archives of CICR.

Created (or rather re-activated) in 1942 by the Comité international de la Croix-Rouge, the Commission des prisonniers, intern?s et civils (Commission PIC) was mandated to deal with all questions relating to the treatment of POWs and civilian internees (which included victims of racial persecution and political detainees). It was incumbent upon the PIC to pass on all necessary instructions to those around the world tasked by the CICR to deal with POWs and internees. The PIC acted in the name of the CICR with respect to the practical execution of the latter's directives. It also had to take initiatives in numerous cases where conventional arrangements either no longer existed or had become inooperatve. During the Second World War the PIC worked closely in collaboration with the Division d'assistance sp?ciale (DAS) to provide material and moral assistance to victims of racial persecution not protected by the Geneva Convention.

In effect up to 1942-1943, questions relating to the persecution of Europe's Jews as well as hostages and political detainees had been dealt with by a variety of different agencies. From 1942 the PIC was charged with the principal questions relating to victims of racial and political persecution. Its activities continued up to the immediate post war period where it became involved with repatriation of deportees.

In addition the Service des colis aux camps de concentration (Service CCC) was created in 1943 and integrated into the DAS in 1944. This organisation worked specifically towards providing assistance for Jews and other civilians in Nazi concentration camps.

Archives du Comité international de la Croix-Rouge (ACICR) collection, 1939-1952, comprises files, reports and correspondence on the following subject areas: general background on hostages and political detainees; hostages and political detainees in Germany; hostages and political detainess by country and nationality (except Germany); assistance to hostages and political detainees; repatriations of deported; case files (all nationalities); civil war in Greece.