Correspondence with Deutsche Rundschau - Pechel, Rudolf

166 items

Founded in 1874 the is a conservative literary and political periodical. Numerous famous German writers, among them Theodor Fontane, had published here. Dr. Rudolf Pechel (1882-1961) became the journal’s editor after the First World War. As Nazi opponent he had been imprisoned in the concentration camps Sachsenhausen and Ravensbrück for several years. In 1946 he reestablished the periodical in Stuttgart. The prolific and highly regarded journalist keenly campaigned for democratic structures in West Germany. See Meyer, W. (ed.), Berlin, Hentrich, 1999, pp. 320-25.

Illustrating the long-term and close association between Pechel and Alfred Wiener, the correspondence centres on the exchange of materials as well as the discussion of current political and cultural affairs. The latter refers specifically to the fight of Antisemitism and other forms of Nazi sympathy in West Germany.

Light is thrown on Pechel’s preofessional activities like public talks or appearances in radio shows, but also on more personal matters such as visits of Wiener at his home or his move to Switzerland (1959). Particular reference is made to a scheduled public talk by Pechel in London (1954). Arranged by The Wiener Library and cancelled eventually, numerous invitations had been sent out to German emigrants, British politicians and members of the Jewish community. The related correspondence documents the network associated with the Library as well as partially existing anti-German concerns on the British side in the early post-war years. A similar network, covering Jewish and gentile German emigrants in Britain, was also involved in arrangements for Pechel’s 75th Birthday (1957).

Several other letters with journalist and later university professor Harry Pross concern an article for the Library’s Bulletin (1956/1957) as well as another one planned by him (1958). The correspondence contains brief memos, address lists, advertisement leaflets, a list of contributors to Pechel’s 75 Birthday (1957), a transcript of a radio speech of Pechel (1959), and not dated drafts of letters.