Lilli Krieger Collection

2 boxes

<div>Lilli Vera Krieger, nee Jacobsohn was born in Berlin on 6 July 1922 as the second daughter of Paul Jacobsohn and Hilde (née Mayer). &nbsp;Her father owned a cardboard box factory at Alexanderplatz in Berlin, which was already funded by his father Eduard Jacobsohn. Her parents were quite well to do, regarding themselves as German not as Jewish until Hitler arrived. She came to England on the Kindertransport on &nbsp;4 May 1939 and was financially supported by the Rotary Club. Her father managed to arrange this with a Mr Mitchell who owned several properties in Worthing, which is where Lilli went to live on arrival in Great Britain. Her sister, Gerda Forsythe née Jacobsohn, came as a nanny two months earlier to Britain. Eventually they lived together prior to getting married. Gerda married Harry John Forsythe (previously known as Hans-Joachim Falk), who was originally also from Berlin. The parents of Gerda and Lilli supported their children financially and with useful advice. They remained in Germany. Paul Jacobsohn, the father,was later deported and died in Theresienstadt . Their mother Hilde Jacobsohn was killed in Auschwitz.&nbsp;</div><div>&nbsp;</div><div>Lilli Krieger’s husband, Alfred Krieger, was born in Moravská Ostrava, Czechoslovakia on the 30 December 1919. He was the only child of Luzie (nee Gold) and Ferdinand Krieger. They all came to Britain in 1939 before the outbreak of war. Alfred Krieger played tennis &nbsp;for his country and when he came to England he was in the Czech army based in Lauder, Scotland. Lilli and Alfred met each other in a shorthand typing school. They married on the 19. August 1944. Two days later he re-joined his unit and was stuck in Czechoslovakia once the Russians invaded. He managed to get out and back to England after two years living on black market cigarettes sent to him by his parents. He worked as a commercial traveller for a handbag company and eventually he and his wife became the owners. Her daughter, Caroline Krieger was born on 16.2.1952. Alfred Krieger died on the 14 June 2000.</div>

<p>This collection comprises the following folders: Personal papers of Lilli Krieger (née Jacobsohn) including Jewish id card and travel document, confirmation that she was not a member of the Bund Deutscher Maedel, school and work references and material re compensation claim, 1922-2006; Lilli Krieger (née Jacobsohn)- school reports, 1929-1937; Lilli Krieger (née Jacobsohn)- correspondence from parents and others, 1922-1957; Jacobsohn family papers including death certificates for Paul and Hildegard and birth certificate for Hildegard, affidavit from Kaethe Jacobsohn re death of brother in law, Paul, and deportation of his wife Hildegard, papers re the firm of Eduard Jacobsohn, 1912-1958;&nbsp; Personal papers of Gerda Forsythe (née Jacobsohn) including Jewish travel document and postwar German passport, certificates, work references, travel papers, compensation claim papers, 1918-2010; Personal papers of Harry John Forsythe (previously known as Hans-Joachim Falk) including Jewish travel pass, British army service and release records, release permit from Sachsenhausen concentration camp (1938), travel papers, various certificates relating to other family members, 1872-1992; Personal papers of Ferdinand Krieger including various certificates and CV, personal papers of Luzie Krieger née Gold including affidavits, certificates and restitution claim material, also Krieger/ Gold family tree, 1894-1984; Personal papers of Alfred Krieger including certificates, army record, work references, compensation claim papers;&nbsp; miscellaneous papers including poem for father's birthday (author Lilli Krieger?).&nbsp;</p>