The Hyphen Social Club: Records and other papers

9 folders

The material was never formally accessioned, but it is thought that it arrived at the Wiener Library sometime in 1990.

Wolfgang Josephs, a German Jew from Berlin, came to Great Britain sometime in the mid 1930s. He was interned as an enemy alien at the outbreak of war and later transported on the 'Dunera' to Hay Internment Camp, Australia. On his return to Great Britain in 1941 he enlisted in the Pioneers Corps, later changing his name to Peter Johnson. He was a military interpreter for the British occupying forces in Germany at Hildesheim, Lower Saxony, from May 1945 to October 1946 where he was involved with the denazification process. Whilst there he also took an interest in the returnees from concentration camps, arranging correspondence between them and their families all over the world. 'The Hyphen' was founded in 1948 by a group of younger continental Jewish refugees (between the ages of 20 and 35), many of whom were the children of members of the Association of Jewish Refugees, who having settled in Great Britain, found that owing to their similar background and experiences they had interests and problems in common. The group was to have no particular religious or political bias. The intention was to provide cultural, social and welfare activities in a way that would enable them to feel at home in their newly adopted country. The name 'The Hyphen' was chosen because it symbolized the gap between the older generation of refugees who had no intention or desire to integrate into British society, and the ideal of seamless integration which the younger generation aspired to but could not immediately realise.<br><br>One of the group's first activities was the setting up of a study and discussion group, which covered topics such as immigration in general- as well as German- Jewish immigration into Britain; German-Jewish history, and British cultural and political topics. Its most popular functions became the social gatherings, dances, and rambles in the Home Counties. 'The Hyphen' never had more than 100 members at one time but there were between 400 and 500 names on its mailing lists. The activities eventually petered out and the group was wound up in 1968. Compared with other German-Jewish institutions it was rather marginal, but for the members it fulfilled a very important function by giving them a sense of belonging during a difficult period of settling in to a new society.

The bulk of the material in this collection comprises the records of 'The Hyphen' social club (1159/1), which the depositor, Peter Johnson, was instrumental in forming and who subsequently became the chairman. Also included are papers relating to the depositor's time in Hildesheim, Lower Saxony, as military interpreter for the British occupying forces in the immediate postwar years (1159/2). In addition there is a file of correspondence relating to Peter Johnson's involvement with the issue of the admission of German airmen to Great Britain for technical training and the dangers thereof (1159/3).