Gertrude Tausinger: family papers

1 box

Gertrud Rosa Josefine Weinreich was born into a well-to-do family of mixed race in Vienna in 1912. Her father, Max Weinreich (1881-1951), was of Jewish descent. He owned a cloth business. Her mother, Josefine ('Josefa') Leopoldine (1889-1970, née Magor) was a Roman Catholic. Gertrud also had a younger brother, Walter Maximilian, who was born in 1914. Gertrud got married to Emil Glaser (b 1892) in Vienna in 1933, a Jewish wholesaler and manufacturer of dental goods. She assisted her husband in his business in a clerical capacity. Three days after the annexation of Austria the businesses of her father and her husband were seized and Gertrud's parents, brother and husband imprisoned at Rosauerlände. Their personal bank accounts were frozen. Over the next three months all family members were released. Gertrud's father had to sign an undertaking to leave Austria. Gertrud and Emil Glaser fled to England via Prague. They arrived in April 1939. Emil Glaser enlisted in the Pioneer Corps. Gertrud's parents escaped to Prague in December 1938. They obtained a visa for France in 1939 where they lived in a hotel in Paris. After evading numerous Nazi search parties, the couple travelled to Vichy-France in 1940. They were later interned at Camp de Gurs. Max and Josefine Weinreich survived the Holocaust and joined their daughter in London after the Second World War. Max Weinreich started a business as a textile merchant. In 1948 Gertrud got married to Leslie ('Ladislas') Geiger (1897-1965), a Hungarian refugee. They had a son, Peter, in 1950. In 1978 Gertrud got remarried to Albert Tausinger, also a Holocaust survivor.

<p><strong><span style="color: #ff0000;">Readers need to reserve a reading room terminal to access this digital material</span></strong></p><p>This collection contains the family papers of Gertrud Tausinger, a Jewish refugee from Vienna who emigrated with her husband to the UK via Prague in 1939. The couple's business and that of her parents were seized shortly after Austria was annexed into the German Third Reich and they were forced to emigrate. Personal papers including birth, baptism, marriage and death certificates; passports, "Heimatschein", ID and membership cards; tax clearance certificate; "Abstammungsnachweis" certificate; alien registration certificates; Leslie Geiger's change of name deed; Peter Geiger's school reports; and naturalisation certificates. Also includes company share certificates; property deeds; papers relating to property insurance; personal correspondence; photographs and a video relating to Albert Tausinger's experiences as a survivor of the Holocaust (1996). English, German, Hungarian, Aramaic</p>