Η Εμπειρία των Εβραίων της Ελλάδας στις οπτικο-ακουστικές Μαρτυρίες

The database gathers for the first time data from 1,552 audiovisual testimonies of 1,091 Greek Jewish survivors of the Holocaust.

In October 2010, the John S. Latsis Public Benefit Foundation chose to fund the research project submitted by the Group for the Study of the History of the Jews of Greece, entitled: “From Between the Wars to Reconstruction (1930-1960). The Experience of the Jews of Greece in Audio-Visual Testimony.” The study was carried out and completed in 2011. The results of the work of the research group are presented in part on its website. These results fall into two categories: The construction of an electronic database in which audiovisual testimonies of Greek Jewish survivors of the Holocaust are catalogued; and processing of the archived material, with the aim of conducting historical studies which shed light on new aspects of the experience of the survivors.By assembling the body of evidence in terms of different moments in time - from the 1950s to today - the issue is raised, as to the investigation of the manifold temporalities of the manner in which the historical experience of the European Jews has been recalled and assembled.

Since 2005, the Group for the Study of the History of the Jews of Greece has organized open discussions, held one Friday afternoon a month, at which invited speakers present their current research on the history and memory of the Jews of Greece. Each year, a two-day meeting is devoted to the investigation of a crucial aspect of the Jewish past and its contemporary record: Greek documentaries about the Greek Jews (2007); the Jews of Thessaloniki in modern times (2008); the economy of the Occupation and the issue of Jewish property (2009); and the presence of Jews in modern Greek literature (2010). The aim of the Group is to highlight the intricate historical path of the Jews of Greece and how this communicates with broader historical processes and historiographical narratives.

The database contains more than 800 pieces of evidence which were collected at different times and in different languages and places: Greece. elsewhere in Europe, the United States, and Israel.The ambition is that the database will be a tool which will facilitate scholars in locating and accessing the material.