Javno tužilaštvo Socijalističke Republike Hrvatske

6 maps; 175 boxes; 200 books

The Public Prosecutor's Office was established in 1945. The Law on the Public Prosecutor's Office was adopted after the promulgation of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1946, and the Public Prosecutor's Office of PRC acted as an organ of public prosecution in the country. Collection holds 9 boxes of the Indictment Ante Pavelic-Andrija Artuković, from 1951 for their extradition. Besides the text of the statutory provisions of the ISC there is evidence, testimony and statements of surviving camp inmates, lists of interned and murdered Jews, etc.
Researchers of the Holocaust will find the boxes 123-130 useful. These boxes contain the legal evidence and the indictment against the leader of the Ustasha movement – Ante Pavelić, and the Minister of Interior of the Independent State of Croatia – Andrija Artuković. In addition, the collection contains copies of various documents related to the activities of Pavelić and Artuković during the war. A unique part of the collection is many testimonies from both victims and perpetrators—approximately 230 testimonies in box 128 and close to 100 in box 129. The specificity of these testimonies is that they were collected at the beginning of the 1950s under the ever-changing circumstances of Yugoslav transitional justice. Due to this provenance, the perpetrators' testimonies are particularly interesting because they contain numerous statements from mid-and low-ranking Ustasha officials and state functionaries of the Independent State of Croatia. Researchers dealing with transitional justice, memory politics, and oral history will find the material particularly useful. Besides the genocide against Jews and Serbs, the collection contains exceptionally valuable testimonies related to the genocide against Sinti and Roma. The Porajmos, which had been touched upon only peripherally in many testimonies during the late 1940s, were brought to the forefront in many of the perpetrator testimonies in the 1950s, especially those included in this collection.