Külföldieket Ellenőrző Országos Központi Hatóság, Általános iratok, 1931-1944

20 fasc., 6 boxes, 2,95 linear metres

The collection was acquired by the Hungarian National Archives in the early 1950s.

The Külföldieket Ellenőrző Országos Központi Hatóság (the Central National Authority for Controlling Foreigners, or KEOKH) exercised the rights of the Minister of the Interior in relation to non-citizens staying in Hungary. Formally, the Central National Authority for Controlling Foreigners functioned as a subdivision of VII (it was VII/c), the public security department of the Ministry of the Interior. KEOKH held authority regarding the right of foreigners to reside in the country as well as in cases of expulsions: in the capital city of Budapest, the Central National Authority for Controlling Foreigners exercised exclusive authority, while in cases from other parts of the country, it had a more supervisory role. The Central Authority was originally established by law in 1930 and started to operate in 1931. It opened and operated bureaus in a host of localities such as Esztergom, Kassa (Košice), Máramarossziget (Sighetu Marmației), Kolozsvár (Cluj), Csíkszereda (Miercurea Ciuc), Újvidék (Novi Sad) and Nagyvárad (Oredea). As can be seen from the list, its activities were concentrated in territories (re)acquired by Hungary between 1938 and 1941. KEOKH also had bureaus in Gyula, Makó and Munkács (Мукачеве) but these were closed in 1940.

KEOKH records are relevant for the study of anti-Semitic radicalization and the Holocaust in Hungary for two chief reasons: it typically suspected foreigners and its reports on the raid it held tend to list the number of Jews concerned and expelled. In certain cases, so called Ostjuden are mentioned separately in these reports. Second, in 1941, KEOKH initiated and implemented the deportation of Jews from Hungary who could not prove their citizenship to newly occupied Galicia. This Hungarian anti-Jewish action eventually led to the first Nazi mass murder with over 10 000 victims. The collection of general records mostly concern the registration, control and investigation of non-resident aliens and those of “uncertain citizenship”, the files of Hungarian family members of foreign citizens, passport cases of foreign citizens, cases of expulsion, report on raids, and cases of emigration from Hungary.