Records of the Mayor of Gyöngyös

20,81 linear metres, paper

The records of the Mayor’s Office were taken over by its successor, the City Council of Gyöngyös in 1950. The City Council handed over the archival collection of the Mayor’s Office to the Eger State Archives. The collection was re-arranged several times and reached its present form in the 2000s.

Mayor (polgármester) was the leading official of the towns and cities in Hungary. The mayor was elected by the Municipal Committee and his powers were regulated by the statutes created by the Committee as well as by Act XXI of 1886 (276. §.) The scope of authority of the Mayor was significantly broadened by Act XXX of 1930, which handed over most of the functions of the City Council to the Mayor’s Office. The Mayor’s Office included several departments according to its main administrative and economic functions.

The collection holds the records of the Mayor, the head of the administration of the town of Eger between 1884 and 1957. Records related to the Holocaust include, but not limited to the following topics: cases of trade licences and permits, citizenship and naturalization cases, disenfranchisement of Jewish citizens, petitions for granting the right to vote, records concerning the implementation of the anti-Jewish laws as well as instances of bureaucratic and illegal antisemitic measures, building permits, cases of military care for the family members of Jewish labour servicemen, registration and nationalization of Jewish landholdings, Jewish responses, including requests for exemption from anti-Jewish laws, registration of non-resident aliens, Jewish military labour service, expropriation and distribution of Jewish property, appointments of non-Jewish wardens and guardians to manage former Jewish shops, workshops and other businesses, exclusion of Jews from the public sphere, inventories of Jewish shops and apartments, petitions of non-Jews for Jewish apartments, shops and property, allocation of Jewish apartments to non-Jews, and requests for goods and raw material confiscated from Jews.