Records of the Subprefect of Nógrád County

11,63 linear metres, paper

The collection was taken to the Salgótarján State Archives in 1950.

Subprefect (alispán) was the chief of the administration of Hungarian counties between 1870 and 1950. Elected by the municipal committees for a term of 6 years, subprefects were granted independent general administrative rights by Act 42 of 1870. The administrative power and authority of subprefects were modified by Act 21 of 1886, Act 30 of 1929, and Act 22 of 1942. The term of subprefects was extended to ten years in 1929 and they were appointed by the Minister of the Interior from 1942. The main task of the subprefect was the implementation of the decisions of the Municipal Committee and the Small Assembly (kisgyűlés), as well as of governmental decrees. He was the superior of all offices and administrative bodies in the county, except special offices appointed directly by ministries. The administrative scope of authority of first instance of the subprefect included the matters of social associations, regulating the press, and the office issuing passports. Besides, the subprefect was entitled to overrule the decisions of the chief constables (administrative heads of county districts) and the village clerks.

The fond of the records of the Subprefect is one of the key collections pertaining to the history of the Jewish communities and the Holocaust in Nógrád County. The material survived from the years 1939-1944 include records concerning the implementation of the anti-Jewish laws as well as the instances of bureaucratic and illegal antisemitic measures, including the withdrawal of trade licences and permits, quitting rental agreements of Jews, exclusion of Jews from the municipal committees and social organizations, internment and legal procedures, police supervision of Jewish individuals, registration and expropriation of Jewish landholdings; administrative procedures against Jewish communities; Jewish responses, including requests for exemption from anti-Jewish laws, cases of magyarization of names, citizenship and naturalization cases, petitions for birth certificates and other family documents, request for passports, activities of Zionist organizations; activities of the national socialists and other extreme right-wing movements, hate speech and propaganda, military labour service, the implementation of anti-Jewish decrees, internment of Jewish individuals, anti-Jewish raids, expropriation of Jewish assets, and requests of non-Jews for Jewish apartments and other assets.