[<<Das>> Dritte Reich; foreign relations]

1 electronic resource (99 pages)

The file contains newspaper articles and reports regarding German policy and economy in the Third Reich. Headlines like 'New wave of pierce terror in Nazi Germany' or 'a step nearer war' can be read. Paul Anderson and several other authors discuss and show the current situation in Germany and the influence of Germany's politics on other countries and on Europe in general. Reports written by Paul Anderson are regarding foreign relationships of Germany and the peasant movements in several countries. Paul Anderson traveled a lot through Eastern and Southern Europe, which gave him the opportunity to study many of the important changes that were taking place during that time. His reports cover topics like the attempt to achieve the 'Anschluss' of Austria in 1934, or the Austro-German agreemant of summer 1936, where the German government recognized officially Austrias independance. Besides a report with the title 'Europe's minority number one' published in 1937 can be seen, which deals with Europe's largest and most discussed minority: the Sudetic German people. More then three hundred German speaking subjects are spreading along the 500 miles borderline between Bohemia and Moravia. After this area lost its economic status unemployment and mass poverty were the results and onwards the growing sympathy for national socialism. The new element, as Anderson argues, which seemed so predominating is a perticular blatant and agressive German nationalism. The 'Daily Harald', in comparison, reports about another series of mass arrests in all parts of Germany. These arrests are so far the latest phase of a terrific wave of persecution, this article was published in 1935, two years before Anderson wrote about the growing sympathy in the Czechoslovak Republic for the Nazis. An other report is based on the informations of an American student who studied in South Eastern Europe and explains how the German foreign policy penetrates and influences Yugoslavia.