Documentation collected in preparation for the Eichmann Trial, 1933-1962

1672 Files

The original documentation of the Eichmann Trial was placed in the Archives of the State of Israel, and the Yad Vashem Archives were given copies of most of the documentation. The Attorney General's Office was responsible for preparing the indictment against Eichmann, and the special Israel police task force for dealing with Nazi war crimes, known as Office 06, was made responsible for preparing the foundation of evidence. During the months that preceded the Eichmann Trial, the unit addressed itself to several main tasks, including the collection of documentation that could contribute to the conviction of Eichmann.

The Mossad (Israel Institute for Intelligence and Special Operations) discovered where Adolf Eichmann was residing in Argentina while using a false identity.  Eichmann was captured and brought to Israel in early 1960.  His trial, which was held in Beit Ha'am in Jerusalem [today, the Gerard Behar Center building], began in April 1961.  The trial lasted for approximately three months, and Eichmann was subsequently sentenced to death for his part in the murder of the Jews of Europe.  Eichmann submitted an appeal to the Israel Supreme Court, but his appeal was denied.  He submitted a request for clemency to the President of the State of Israel, and this appeal was also rejected.  Adolf Eichmann was executed by hanging in the Ramla Jail in early 1962.  His body was cremated and the ashes were scattered in the Mediterranean Sea.

The Office 06 investigators gathered the material from Nuremberg Trials documentation, documents from the German Foreign Ministry and other sources. Due to this fact, the collection also contains documents known from other sources. There are also original documents, such as opinions collected in anticipation of the trial regarding Eichmann's activities and protocols of testimonies recorded by the 06 investigators. The Record Group contains approximately 1,700 documents. In general, most of the material consists of copies that have been duplicated on duplicating machines with the 06 Unit Logo alongside the consecutive number of the document within the 06 material appearing at the top of each page. Most of the documentation is written in German, with a small number in other languages including Hebrew. Some of the documents were translated into Hebrew during the trial, and they, too, are part of the Record Group. The 06 investigators prepared a detailed catalogue including a description of each document, except for a few score of documents which were apparently received late in the trial.