Fondų apskaitos ir apsaugos skyrius

Judaica holdings are classified as primary (VŽM) and academic support (VŽMP) collections under the Museum’s statute with consideration of the extant value of the item as a museum piece. Currently around 30,000 items are being conserved. 
Primary collection consists of:

1. Household decorative items, ritual equipment, tangible exhibition pieces of historical significance.

2. Writings and documents.

3. Photography.

4. Visual and decorative art. 

5. Sculptor Jacques Lipchitz‘s memorial collection.

6. Archive of Josif Shapiro (collector of ex-libris).

The collections include:

1.	Household decorative items, ritual equipment, tangible exhibition pieces of historical significance. Materials include metal, wood, leather, ceramics, precious metals, textiles, bone and other materials. Among these items are around 100 unique artifacts from Paneriai mass killing sites, material from the ghetto period and from prisoners, people who perished and people who survived. There are also artifacts of the Great Synagogue and from Jewish cemeteries.

2.	Writings and documents include books, press, manuscripts, posters, documents. There are 5000 items in total. 177 of them are in written form: 91 ghetto publicationsistic or literary manuscripts (21 letters, 40 books, 25 newspapers and journals). Among the various unique documents are 15 pages of Polish journalist Kazimierz Sakowicz’s diary written in Paneriai in Polish from July 1941 until 1942, a diary from the Šiauliai ghetto, and several diaries from the Vilnius and Kaunas ghettos. Personal collections of 52 persons relating to the Holocaust (documents given by survivors, documents given by family members of the survivors, documents that give information about the Holocaust).

3.	Photography: photographs, negatives, postcards (5000 items, half of which are digitalized and most of which  relate to the Holocaust).

4.	Visual and decorative art: drawings, graphics, paintings (several hundred created in the ghetto period, hidden by prisoners, rescued or created by  survivors after the war, donated by  families of  survivors); sculptures (betweet them there are rescued by the survivors), textiles, ceramics, glass, leather, metal. A (artifacts and documents from the Vilnius ghetto and Paneriai mass murder site; artifacts which belonged to Vilnius ghetto fighters).

5.	Sculptor Jacques Lipchitz’s memorial collection.

6.     Archive of Josif Shapiro (collector of ex-libris).