Okresný ľudový súd v Banskej Bystrici

76 boxes, paper documents.

No data available.

Following Second World War trials with Nazi criminals and their collaborators were organized on the territory of restored Czechoslovakia just like in many other European countries of those days. Three-tier retributive justice system was established in the Slovak part of post-war Czechoslovakia by the Regulation of the Slovak National Council no. 33/1945 on the Punishment of Fascist Criminals, Occupants, Traitors and Collaborators and on the Establishment of People’s Judiciary.
District People’s Courts (Okresný ľudový súd), which were established at district seats with the jurisdiction over the territory of specific districts represented the second tier within the system of the retributive judiciary in Slovakia. Within their jurisdiction fall all criminal offenses stipulated by the Regulation No. 33/1945 with the exception of cases under the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Court (which tried only the leading officials of former Slovak Republic (1939-1945)).
A 5-member Senates of District People´s Courts, consisting of a Senate president and four members decided cases. The Senate president and his deputy had to be professional judges.

The fonds contains files pertaining the persecution of Jews at the territory of Slovakia (1938-1945). Some of the files contain the information on the so called aryanization of Jewish enterprise property in Banská Bystrica and other places (Podkriváň). There is also a file on the aryanization of the so called agricultural property in Zlaté Moravce. Then there are files pertaining the forced labor of Jews from Banská Bystrica and the activities of the Hlinka Guard in this regard. Various suspects were members of the Hlinka Slovak People´s Party (HSĽS) and the Hlinka Guard. The fonds contains files with the information on deportation of Jews from Banská Bystrica in 1942 as well as the file concerning the former guard at the Concentration Center for Jews in Žilina in 1942. 
Various files contain the documents and information on the persecution of Jews during the period of occupation of Slovakia (1944-1945). Various files contain the information on hiding of Jews in Banská Bystrica, Iliaš, Kostiviarska, Poniky as well as the denunciation and detention of Jews during this period. Several files pertain the activities of the Emergency Units of the Hlinka Guard (Pohotovostné oddiely Hlinkovej gardy) and the Sicherheitsdienst (SD) in the area of Banská Bystrica, Krupina, Handlová, Topoľčany etc. There are also files pertaining the mass murders in Kremnička and Nemecká.