Policajné riaditeľstvo v Prešove

11,50 lm. Paper documents.

No data available.

Police Directorate in Prešov was established on 10 November 1938. After the Vienna  Arbitration (November 2, 1938), Košice was ceded to Hungary and, together with several other political institutions and offices, the Police directorate was moved from Košice to Prešov. 
The new Police Directorate in Prešov started its activity on January 1, 1939  and its territorial jurisdiction was completely identical to the territory of the later established Šariš-Zemplín County.
The structure of the Police Directorate consisted of five departments. Since its establishment, it has been subject to the Interior Ministry of the Slovak Land (Slovenská krajina), following the creation of the Slovak State (March 14, 1939) Ministry of the Interior of the Slovak State. In December 1939, the police directorates were subordinated to county and district offices, and the Police Directorate in Prešov was subordinated to the County Office of Šariš-Zemplín County in Prešov. Since January 1940, the Police Directorate in Prešov was subordinated to the State Security Headquarters (ÚŠB) in Bratislava in matters of the state security.
The police director was responsible for the police headquarters and his police activities. The first police director in Prešov was Koloman Bielický, who held this position from the beginning of 1939 until 1940. From January 1940 until mid-1942 there was the police director Gustáv Pongrácz. Since July 1942 Pavel Macháček has been in this position.Police directorate in Prešov was, among other things, responsible for monitoring of political oponents, Jews, foreigners. It kept the lists of foreign citizens and acted against the illegal crossing of borders. It also dealt with matters of press and its censorship.

Fonds contains various documents pertaining the persecution of Jews and political oponents of the regime. Besides that it contains various important lists of Jews living at the territory under the control of the Police Directorate in Prešov such as the list of Jewish employees living in Prešov from 1941; the list of Jews who were not subjected to the social security and health insurance from districts Michalovce, Medzilaborce, Bardejov, Sabinov, Stropkov, Vranov nad Topľou, Trebišov, Giraltovce and Humenné. Then there is a list of Jews of so called problematic citizenship who lived in Prešov without the passport; the list of Jews captured by the Economic Police based on the order of the State Security Headquarters or the list of employees of the Jewish Center´s  (Ústredňa Židov) District Branches. 
Fonds contains also list of Jews – holders of the work permits and the so called presidential exemptions and the list of Jews with so called „yellow identification card“ from districts Prešov, Michalovce, Humenné, Medzilaborce. One of the most important documents is list of Jews living in Prešov due to February 1.-2., 1944 and list of Jewish inhabitants of Prešov sorted according to their domicile (Street No.).