Národný súd

23,3 linear meters. Paper documents as well as microfilms.

Following Second World War trials with Nazi criminals and their collaborators were organized on the territory of restored Czechoslovakia just like in many other European countries of those days. Three-tier retributive justice system was established in the Slovak part of Czechoslovakia by the Regulation of the Slovak National Council no. 33/1945 on the Punishment of Fascist Criminals, Occupants, Traitors and Collaborators and on the Establishment of People’s Judiciary. National Court represented the highest tier of the system of the retributive justice.
Within its jurisdiction fall: former President of Slovak Republic (1939-1945); members of governments created in Slovakia (1939-1945); members of the Diet of Slovak Republic (1939-1945); members of the State Council, members of the Main Command of the Hlinka Guard; Hlinka Youth and their functionaries; chiefs of Propaganda; Ambassadors and plenipotentiary ministers; Heads of German and Hungarian national groups  and their deputies; main former officials responsible for anti-racial persecution; chiefs of the State Security Headquarters; members of the Highest Court of Slovakia (1939-1945). The law stipulated that additional persons can fall within the jurisdiction of National Court based upon the decision of Slovak National Council.
A 7-member senate of the National Court, consisting of a Senate president and six member decided cases. The Senate president and his deputy had to be professional judges.
 A 5-member Senates of District People´s Courts, consisting of a Senate president and four member decided cases. The Senate president and his deputy had to be professional judges.

The fonds contains files pertaining to the activities of the National Court, the highest court within the system of retributive justice in Slovak part of Czechoslovakia after the Second World War. Within the jurisdiction of National Court fall main representatives of Hlinka Slovak People´s Party regime as well as main officials responsible for the anti-Jewish policy in Slovakia 1939-1945. The National Court also prosecuted several former officials of Nazi Germany active at the territory of Slovakia during the years 1939-1945.
The fonds of National Court stored in Slovak National Archives contains case files of former president of Slovakia Jozef Tiso, former Slovak prime minister Vojtech Tuka, Interior minister and Main Commander of Hlinka Guard Alexander Mach, as well as case files of other members of governments of Slovakia (1939-1945). It also contains case files of members of parliament or high ranking officials of the Hlinka Guard. 
Among others there is also a case file of Anton Vašek, the former head of Department 14 at the Ministry of Interior, which was responsible for the anti-Jewish policy of the Ministry incuding the organizing of deportation of Jews from Slovakia or the forced labor of Jews. 
Many files within the fonds contain crucial information on the anti-Jewish policy in Slovakia, its origins as well as consequences. This includes the information on aryanisation of property, deportation of Jews, activities of various state a security agencies, Gendarmerie as well as paramilitary organizations (Hlinka Guard, Hlinka Youth, Freiwillige Schutzstaffel etc.). Last but not least, the fonds contains information on political activities of Nazi Germany and its officials in Slovakia in 1938-1945.