Hlavnoslúžnovský úrad v Košiciach

54 boxes, paper documents.

Documents of former Chief Constable´s Office in Košice (Kassa) were moved transferred to the possession of the State archive of Košice in 1954. All documents were then taken over by the branch of the Košice state archive in 1961 which started to process them in 1962. Part of the documents was shredded and the rest of them was sorted out and put into 54 boxes. The whole fonds was then inventorized.

Based on the Vienna Arbitration (2 November 1938) Košice and its vicinity were occupied by Hungarian army on November 10, 1938. The former District Office in Košice evacuated and the city of Košice (Kassa) became the City of Municipal Right with the special competences. At the same time, it became the seat of the Chief Constable´s Office in Košice (Főszolgabírói hivatal Kassa) as the regional state administrative body with 12 subordinated notary offices in the surrounding territory.
The creation of the Chief Constable´s Office was not immediate as right after the occupation of Košice (Kassa) the District military administration of the surrounding territory of Košice was established. Lt. Col. Kertész served as the head of this administration. The military administration lasted until the 22 December 1938 when the Chief Constable´s Office was created. Its head was Dr. Koloman Katra who held this position until 15 October 1944 and was then replaced by J. Hutka.

The fonds contains various documents of the Chief Constable´s Office in Košice (Kassa) which pertain various political and economical issues of the area during the period 1939-1945. Among others, this fonds contains documents on the economic persecution of Jews in Košice and its vicinity, such as limitations of new licenses for Jews, various sanctions against Jewish tradesmen etc. The fonds also contains the list of Jewish businessmen (licence owners). There are also documents pertaining to the revision of the state citizenship of Jews as well as the documents on their concentration in the labor camp in Košice. Other documents pertain the exclusion of Jews from public service and the confiscation of their stock and equipment. 
Fonds also contains the documents on the activities of Levente and the Nyilaskeresztes Párt (the Arrow Cross Party) in the area.