Okresný úrad v Hlohovci

52,1 linear meters, paper documents.

The fonds was inventorized in 1964-1965.

he District Office in Hlohovec was a state administration body. It was established during the period of 1st Czechoslovak Republic (1918-1938) and it existed also during the period of the Slovak state/ Slovak Republic (1939-1945).  Since 1 January 1940, the Hlohovec district was incorporated into the the newly established Nitra County (Nitrianska župa) and was subordinated to the County Office of the Nitra County (Župný úrad Šarišsko-zemplínskej župy) with the seat in Nitra. The District Chief (Okresný náčelník) was the head of District Office in Hlohovec with the responsibility for the state administration in the district as well as the work of the District Office. From 1 January 1940 District Chief was subordinated to the respected County Office and the Ministry of Interior. District Offices were superior to the local notary offices and regional notary offices which were the lowest level bodies of the state administration in Slovakia 1938-1945. Due to the fact that in the period 1938-1945 the vaste majority of anti-Jewish measures in Slovakia were put to life by the state administration bodies archival documents of District Offices represent some of the most important sources for the research of Holocaust in Slovakia.

Reports on expulsion of Jews in 1938 by members of Hlinka Guard, dismissal of Jewish Party. It also contains documents on imprisonment of individuals in political prison in Ilava. As for the property persecution, the fonds contains documents on cancellation of licences belonging to Jews and appointing of governmental officials into the enterprises owned by Jews. There are documents on compulsory marking of stores owned by Jews in the district too. Fonds also contains various instructions and circular letters concerning variety of anti-Jewish measures, including the dismissal of Jews from public sevice.  Fonds contains documents on Jewish movable property (lists of items). Other documents concern the reports on baptism of Jews in the district. Some documents concern the issue of work permits of Jews. 
There are also documents pertaining to the persecution of Roma.