Okresný ľúdový súd v Rožňave

8 boxes, paper

Once the Regulation on the retributive justice ceased to be valid on 31 December 1948, documents of District People´s Courts together with the documents of their prosecutors were transferred to respective Regional Courts (Krajský súd). Documents of several District People´s Courts were thus concentrated in the Regional Court in Košice. The court had transferred those to the State archive in Košice on 31 October 1961. These documents were however quite unsorted and incomplete and the State archive in Košice started to sort them out in 1961. Documents were then divided into several archival fonds, including the fonds of the District People´s Court in Rožňava. Printed register of the fonds was created in 1964.

Following the Second World War trials with Nazi criminals and their collaborators were organized on the territory of restored Czechoslovakia just like in many other European countries of those days. Three-tier retributive justice system was established in the Slovak part of post-war Czechoslovakia by the Regulation of the Slovak National Council no. 33/1945 on the Punishment of Fascist Criminals, Occupants, Traitors and Collaborators and on the Establishment of People’s Judiciary.
District People’s Courts (Okresný ľudový súd), which were established at district seats with the jurisdiction over the territory of specific districts represented the second tier within the system of the retributive judiciary in Slovakia. Within their jurisdiction fall all criminal offenses stipulated by the Regulation No. 33/1945 with the exception of cases under the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Court (which tried only the leading officials of former Slovak Republic (1939-1945)).
A 5-member Senates of District People´s Courts, consisting of a Senate president and four member decided cases. The Senate president and his deputy had to be professional judges.

Fonds contains files pertaining the persecution of Jews at the territory of Hungary as well as Slovakia (1938-1945). It contains the information on various forms of persecution Jews  and handling of Jewish property in Rožňava as well as on handling the Jewish property in ghetto in Plešivec.
Besides that fonds contains the file concerning the prosecution of the former member of SS who served as a guard in Auschwitz from Summer 1943 to 1945.
It also contains file with the information on persecution of Roma members of the partisan unit in Sadovce and several files concerning the persecution of Jews in various Slovak towns including Poprad, Slavošovce, Štítnik.