Povereníctvo priemyslu a obchodu - VII. odbor

In order to deal with the matter of property persecution and restitution of Jewish property after the Second World War in the Slovak part of Czechoslovakia, the special department of the Comission for the Industry and Commerce was established in in June 1945. Its mission was to liquidate former Central Economic Office (Ústredný hospodársky úrad) responsible for the major part of the so called Aryanization of property, as well as to legally deal with the restitution and to prepare the restitution law.
Besides that the Department VII dealt with the issue of so called National Administration (Národná správa) of property, took care of administration of blocked accounts, tax issues etc.

In 1946 the Department VII was formally dissolved and its agenda was taken over by the newly established Presidial Department 5 (Prez 5).
This department kept records on all restitution claims, issued official statements in regards to previously Aryanized property, controlled the bank accounts with assets whose owners were deported from Slovakia in 1942 or 1944/1945, and kept records on blocked accounts and payments made to these blocked accounts (repayment of the liquidating value of Aryanized enterprises etc.). After another organizational change the Presidial Department 5 was dissolved in 1948 and its agenda was taken over by another department. Due to the changes in Czechoslovakia pertaining to the establishemnt of Communist regime as well as subsequent dissolving of Commission for Industry and Commerce in 1951 the whole agenda was closed in 1952.

The subfonds of the Comission for the Industry and Commerce - Department VII  contains documents pertaining to the restitution of property of Jews living in Slovak part of Czechoslovakia after the Second World War. The Comission for the Industry and Commerce - Department VII was a special department with the task to legally deal with the issue of restitution of property Aryanized during the rule of the Hlinka Slovak People´s Party in  1939-1945. The Department VII  took over a big part of documents of former Central Economic Office (Ústredný hospodársky úrad) which was responsible for the major part of Aryanization process in Slovakia 1939-1945. This subfonds thus contains several hundreds of boxes with files on formerly Aryanized enterprises, as well as houses (residential property) and movable property. These files usually contain documents created during the process of so called Aryanization, including whole case files of the Central Economic Office (Ústredný hospodársky úrad). Besides that the subfonds contains documents on restitution of the property (or restitution claims) as well as on the fate of former owners. Records of the Department VII are closely related to another fonds stored in the Slovak National Archive, namely to the fond Ústredný hospodársky úrad.