Okresný ľúdový súd v Kremnici

5 boxes, paper documents.

No data available.

Following the Second World War trials with Nazi criminals and their collaborators were organized on the territory of restored Czechoslovakia just like in many other European countries of those days. Three-tier retributive justice system was established in the Slovak part of post-war Czechoslovakia by the Regulation of the Slovak National Council no. 33/1945 on the Punishment of Fascist Criminals, Occupants, Traitors and Collaborators and on the Establishment of People’s Judiciary.
District People’s Courts (Okresný ľudový súd), which were established at district seats with the jurisdiction over the territory of specific districts represented the second tier within the system of the retributive judiciary in Slovakia. Within their jurisdiction fall all criminal offenses stipulated by the Regulation No. 33/1945 with the exception of cases under the exclusive jurisdiction of the National Court (which tried only the leading officials of former Slovak Republic (1939-1945)).
A 5-member Senates of District People´s Courts, consisting of a Senate president and four member decided cases. The Senate president and his deputy had to be professional judges.

The fonds contains various files concerning the persecution of Jews in Slovakia (1938-1945). There is a file of the former local dignitary of the Hlinka Slovak People´s Party in Kremnica which contains the information on the persecution of the specific Jewish family in Kremnica. Two files contain the information on the activities of the Emergency Unit of the Hlinka Guard in Kremnica (Pohotovostný oddiel Hlinkovej gardy) in 1944. THese files contain the testimonies of Jewish survivors. Another file contains the info on activities of the Abwehrgruppe 218 Edelweiss and its action in Krížna. Then there is a file which pertains the arresting of Jews in Horná Štubňa and the mass murder in Dolný Turček.  There are five separate case files of the former members of SS who served as guards in Auschwitz and one case file of the former member of SS who served as a guard in Buchenwald and Mauthausen.