Ústredňa štátnej bezpečnosti

145 linear meters, paper documents.

Documents of the State Security Headquarters were transferred to Prague after 1945 and stored in the archive of the Ministry of Interior. The fonds was sorted there and transferred to the Slovak National Archives in June 1991 based on the order of the Federal Minister of Interior.

The State Security Headquarters (Ústredňa štátnej bezpečnosti, Slovak abbreviation ÚŠB, English abbreviation SSH) was the highest police authority of Slovak Republic (1939-1945). It was the secret service and political police of Tiso´s regime with the defensive intelligence task. 
The State Security Headquarters existed officially from January 1, 1940 but the decision to create such body was made much earlier, in Fall 1939.  By 1942 the SSH existed within the Police department of the Ministry of Interior. From July 1942 it functioned as the separate body with the competence over the whole territory of Slovakia of those days.
The SSH was granted competence to follow all matters of political nature, namely activities of socialists, Communists, Jewish question, activities of ethnic minorities, political parties, matters of Hlinka Guard, Hlinka Youth, Deutsche Partei, Deutsche Jugend etc. Besides that it also monitored border incidents, resistance. It also controlled the censorship of press.
The SSH was relatively small. Besides the Central bureau in Bratislava it had two branch bureaus (Odbočka ÚŠB) acting within the Police directorates in Prešov and Zvolen.
The Bratislava-based Central bureau included about 120 employees, out of which 1/3 were administrative employees and the rest were operatives. Branch offices employed about 13 operatives in Prešov and about 5 in Zvolen:

The fonds contains Fond obsdocuments of the State Security Headquarters (Ústredňa štátnej bezpečnosti),  the former political police and security service of the Slovak republic (1939-1945).  It contains various documents on activities of Communists, socialists, political parties and their organizations (including Hlinka Slovak People´s Party, Hlinka Guard, Hlinka Youth, Deutsche Partie and Deutsche Jugeng). It also includes reports and documents on activities Jewish individuals, Jewish Center (Ústredňa Židov), anti-Jewish measures of various kind. Besides other documents there are various lists of Jews created during the period 1939-1945 at different places in Slovakia. These include for example lists of Jews from labor camps and sites as well as documents on Jews imprisoned in the political prison in Ilava.
The fonds also contains documents on baptizing of Jews during the period of their deportation from Slovakia 1942 and the investigation of priests.
The fonds contains card files, which are alphabetically organized and provide the basic information on individual records within the fonds. This card files is however not accessible for research.