Чернігівська міська управа, м. Чернігів Чернігівської області

1175 files

Local administration documentation can contain information connected to the Holocaust in the area. Titles and sizes of the selected files potentially related to the subject:

File 1. Printed orders, decrees and announcements of the Ortskommandantur and city board about organizing of district boards, village elders and their tasks, tax payments, and other issues, 33 pages. 

File 2. Orders within city board about list of staff members, hiring and dismissal of servants. Memo from Baran-Butovych regarding releasing POWs from the camps, dwellers of Chernihiv and nearby villages, 43 pages.

File 3. Orders by city board about registration of the city population and cartage; about return of typewriters, mimeographs and various articles taken by the population from establishments and private apartments; about renaming streets and on the other issues, 33 pages.

File 5. Orders by Chernihiv city board about introducing curfew and giving cow milk to the authorities. Correspondence with the Ortskommandantur about reduction of the city board, state of the city fire brigade, road repairs, opening of “Sich” club, selling of estates belonged to Jews, administrative fines and other issues, 33 pages.

File 11. Acceptance report and memo by newly appointed Nosenko about situation in city jail. List of prisoners and their claims about mistaken arrest, 32 pages. 

File 12. Statements by Chernihiv dwellers about registration in the city, claims for financial support, applications for job admission and other issues, 55 pages.

File 65. Lists of employees in academic, arts establishments, physicians, employees of cultural establishments, educational institutions and prayer houses that existed before the war and during the German occupation, 26 pages.

File 68. Data on population statistics of Chernihiv, 43 pages.

File 140. Lists of staff of Chernihiv city board and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 80 pages.

File 142. Lists of staff of educational department of the city board and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 13 pages. 
 
File 170. Lists of stuff of “Ukrainian Polissia” editorial board to obtain ration cards, 11 pages. 

File 199. Lists of stuff of Chernihiv criminal police and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 6 pages.

File 200. Lists of stuff of Chernihiv security police and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 6 pages.

File 201. Lists of stuff of Gestapo and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 13 pages.

File 202. Lists of employees for Gendarmerie and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 12 pages.

File 203. Lists of stuff of the Ukrainian auxiliary police of Chernihiv district and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 8 pages.

File 204. Lists of stuff of German police SD to obtain ration cards, 13 pages.

File 205. Lists of the GVA policemen and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 9 pages.

File 206. Lists of Chernihiv Schutz police and their dependants to obtain ration cards, 13 pages.

File 207. List of employees of German Order police, 2 pages.

File 208. List of employees of Chernihiv district police, 10 pages.

File 210. List of employees of Chernihiv feldkommandantur and their dependants, 8 pages.

File 211. List of employees of German police and their dependants, 18 pages.

File 212. List of employees of Chernihiv city police and their dependants, 23 pages.

File 213. List of employees of Chernihiv city board and their dependants, 83 pages.

File 216. List of employees of Chernihiv district board and their dependants, 23 pages.

File 540. List and claims by employees of Ukrainian unit at the German police of Chernihiv to be allocated plots, 11 pages.