Regional department of militia in the city of Kirovohrad

File 1 at the Inventory 2 of the collection contains reports and statements about atrocities of the German occupiers and material damage caused by them in Kirovohrad region during the occupation: 

P. 8 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Kirovohrad by the German occupiers;

P. 21 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jews in Holovanivsk village of Odesa region by the German occupiers;

P. 22 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in village Novo-Starodub in Petrovskyi district by the German occupiers;

P. 30 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jews in Hashchevate village by the German occupiers;

P. 47 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Oleksandriia district by the German occupiers;

Pp. 55-56 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Novoheorgyivka district by the German occupiers;

P. 72 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Bobrynets district by the German occupiers;

P. 74 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Pishchano-Brodskyi district by the German occupiers;

P. 75 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Zlatopil district by the German occupiers;

P. 76 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Novo-Ukraina district by the German occupiers;

Pp. 78-79 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish population in Tishkovskyi district by the German occupiers;

P. 125 - Statement of the Soviet Extraordinary Commission about the murder of the Jewish children of the orphanage in Holovanivsk district of Odesa region by the German occupiers;

P. 108-114 - List of the Jews murdered by the Germans in Ulianiv (Hrushky) district.