Max Eisikovits recordings

Max (Miksa, Mihály) Eisikovits (1908-1983), Romanian composer, conductor, musicologist and pedagogue; from 1946 associated with the Conservatory of Music in Cluj-Napoca. In 1938-1939 Eisikovits traveled to Jewish settlements in the Máramaros region of Transylvania (then part of Hungary; currently Maramures, Romania) to collect songs from the area's Hasidic population. Eisikovits sensed that these communities were threatened; today his field notations, comprising some 160 melodies, stand as unique documentation of the music traditions of a culture that was destroyed during the Holocaust. Resuming his career after the war, Eisikovits drew on his collection for a series of folk-based art songs and instrumental compositions; decades after his death his original transcriptions were published in the volume "És a halottak újra énekelnek ..." : Eiskovits Miksa Máramarosi haszid zsidó zenei gyűjtéses (1938-1939) (After all the dead sing again ..." (Miksa Eisikovits's Hasidic Jewish music collection from Maramureş (1938-1939)), edited by Elek Judit (Budapest, 2018).

A collection of recordings by Max Eisikovits, Romanian composer, conductor, musicologist and pedagogue, including a publication and documentary: 1. Toamna Muzcala Clujeana Cenenar 'Max Eisikovits' - An autumn musical at the Max Eisikovits Center in Cluj. Performance recording dated October 8, 2008. 2. "Seara de muzica romaneasca" - Evening of Romanian Music including performers: Formatia Art-Contrast (Art-Contrast ensemble, Violin, Viola, Piano). Features two instrumental works by Max Eisikovits. Performance recording dated March 12, 2012. Track listing on CD insert card. 3. Barabas Kasler Magda, Recital de Lieduri. Features three Lieder by Max Eisikovits. Home-burned copy of LP recording Electrecord ECE 01926. Track listing on CD insert card. 4. Recital of religious songs by Haim Eisikovits (cousin of Max Eisikovits). Recorded Baia Mare circa1980s. Track listing on CD insert. 5. DVD documentary on Eisikovits