Jacob and Frida Lewinter papers

box

oversize boxes

book enclosure

1

2

1

5 negatives,

Jacob Lewinter (1917-2014) was born in Lwów, Poland (Lviv, Ukraine). He grew up in a religious family in Tarnopol (Ternopil, Ukraine). During World War II, he served in the Red Army. His father, Yechiel, and his brother, Lusio, were both murdered during the Holocaust. Jacob met and married Frida Szmulewicz in Leningrad in 1946. They had two daughters, Sophia (born Serka, later Sophia Braun, b. 1947) and Milka (born Ludmiła). In 1957 the family moved to Wrocław, Poland. In 1968, after an increase in anti-Semitism in Poland, the family decided to immigrate to Israel. Sophia left in March 1968, and Jacob, Frida, and Milka joined her six months later.

Frida Lewinter (née Szmulewicz, 1922-2014) was born in Leningrad, Russia (Saint Petersburg) to Mojsiej and Sara Batya Szmulewicz. She had two brothers, Boris (Baruch) and Roma (Reuven). Boris volunteered with the Red Army and was killed three months after World War II began. Roma served in the Russian Navy and survived the war. He and his wife Dr. Gitta Konczan immigrated to Israel in 1990. Frida met and married Jacob Lewinter in Leningrad in 1946. They had two daughters, Sophia (born Serka, later Sophia Braun, b. 1947) and Milka (born Ludmiła). In 1957 the family moved to Wrocław, Poland. In 1968, after an increase in anti-Semitism in Poland, the family decided to immigrate to Israel. Sophia left in March 1968, and Jacob, Frida, and Milka joined her six months later.

The collection consists of documents, correspondence, and photographs relating to the postwar lives of Jacob and Frida Lewinter and their children Sophia and Milka in Saint Petersburg, Wrocław, Poland, and Israel. Biographical materials include photocopies of identification papers, genealogical materials, and financial documents. The bulk of the correspondence consists of letters to Jacob and Frida from their daughter Sophia and her then-husband Arthur Segal. Photographs and albums include portraits and travel photographs of the family in Russia, Poland, and Israel.