Prywatna Koedukacyjna Szkoła Powszechna Towarzystwa Popierania Szkolnictwa Żydowskiego i Kultury Żydowskiej „Szuł-Kult“ z żydowskim językiem nauczania w Wilnie

Shul-Kult School in Wilno, Poland

Žydų mokyklų ir kultūros rėmimo draugijos „Šul-Kult“ privati mišri pradžios mokykla jidiš dėstomąja kalba Vilniuje (Fond 294)

3,531 digital images, JPEG

Lietuvos centrinis valstybės archyvas

The Shul-Kult was opened in Wilno, Poland (currently Vilnius, Lithuania) in 1923 under the auspices of the Society for the Promotion of Jewish Education and Jewish Culture ("Szuł-Kult") in Poland. It was a seven-year coeducational school with Yiddish as the primary language of instruction. History: On August 13, 1928, the Vilnius School District Board of Trustees issued to the First Jewish Mixed School “Šul-Kult” in Vilnius a permit no. I - 29373/28 From the beginning of the 1929/1930 school year, the school was named Private Šul-Kult Primary School No. 23 in Vilnius. According to the resolution of the Vilnius School District Curator no. Since the beginning of the 1932/1933 school year, the I-153/32 school has been renamed the Šul-Kult Private Mixed Primary School of the Jewish Schools and Cultural Support Society in Yiddish. The owner of the school was Šul-Kult, an association for the support of Jewish schools and culture. The activities of the school were controlled by the Vilnius City School Inspectorate, the Vilnius School District Board of Trustees and the Ministry of Religions and Public Education of the Republic of Poland. The head of the private mixed Yiddish school of the Jewish Schools and Cultural Support Association Šul-Kult in Yiddish, the language of instruction in Vilnius, wrote to the Inspector of Vilnius Primary Schools on November 11, 1939, asking to accept the school under the auspices of the Lithuanian state. The school was nationalized and renamed Vilnius City Primary School No. 56. By the Order of the Minister of Education of the Republic of Lithuania of 21 December 1939 No. 114 from 01.12.1939 was appointed Vilnius City Primary School No. Head 56. In the 1939/1940 school year, Vilnius City Primary School No. 56 still in operation. No school closing date has been set. [Source: Central State Archive of Lithuania https://www.archyvai.lt/lt/fondai/bendrasis_mokymas/lcva_f294_pazyma.html]

School’s bylaws, administrative records, minutes and resolutions of the teachers' council meetings, curricula, schedule of lessons, personnel files, planning materials and activities reports, statistical data, and correspondence. It also includes a list of teachers and students, requests from parents for the admission of their children to school, graduation certificates, class registration journals and other records.