Sommer and Bloch family papers

box

1

Ralph Sommer (1926-1988) was born Rolf Sommer to Moses Sommer and Flora Bloch Sommer. He was born and raised in Königheim, Germany. Flora was able to obtain a visa to travel to the United States through her sister Betty and husband Leo Hanauer, and lived in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Meanwhile, Moses and Ralph continued to live in France. During the occupation, both were sent to Camp des Milles in 1941, where Moses died soon after. Ralph was actually able to obtain a visa through his family, and left the camp, but was not allowed to leave the country. Instead, Ralph joined the French Resistance while living in Chauvigny under the name Jean Sommer. After the occupation he also enlisted in the French Army. After the war, Ralph moved to the United States and married Harriet Sommer and had three children, Michele, Caren, and Richard.

Fred Hanauer (1913-2007) was born in Paris, France before moving to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania with his parents Leo and Betty (nee Bloch) Hanauer. During the war, Fred maintained correspondence with his Uncle Julio living in Colombia, along with other friends and family members in order to get relatives out of Europe. Along with efforts in try to help his uncle Moses emigrate, Fred attempted to assist Norbert and Sophie Bloch as well, ultimately failing as the two were sent to Auschwitz where they were killed.

The Sommer and Bloch family papers primarily document Ralph Sommer, a Jewish refugee who was imprisoned in the Camp des Milles internment camp and later was a member of the French resistance and the French military. Another major portion of the papers contain correspondence from Fred Hanauer, who was a cousin of Ralph's living in the United States and who coordinated efforts with other family members in assisting relatives imprisoned in concentration camps in Europe. Included in the collection is correspondence, identification papers, military papers, and travel visas. The Sommer and Bloch family papers contains primarily records relating to Ralph Sommer while living in France, and correspondence with members of the Bloch family, coordinated with Fred Hanauer. The items concerning Ralph include identity cards, photographs, certificates of good conduct, a travel visa, and a handwritten curriculum vitae. Also included are documents regarding his service in the French Resistance and Military. The correspondence regarding the Bloch family consists entirely of letters and telegrams between Fred, his Uncle Julio, and other relatives and friends, and document the efforts made by the Bloch family in attempting to secure visas to other imprisoned family members. Another series of records consists of various documents related to other relatives, including a death certificate for Moses Sommer, a funeral booklet for Melanie Bloch, and copies of birth certificates for other members of the Sommer family.