Commissioner for the Four-Year Plan, Herman Göring

Beauftragter für den Vierjahresplan (Herman Göring) (Fond 700)

9 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

7,590 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

Hermann Göring was appointed as the Commissioner for the Four-Year Plan on October 18, 1936. This appointment, as well as that of the Commissar for Raw Materials and Foreign Currency, gives Göring a great deal of influence over the German economy. Between 1937 and 1941, Göring exercises nearly absolute power over the country's economy. The Four-Year Plan had four priorities: 1. To increase agricultural production; 2. Retrain key sectors of the work force; 3. Government regulation of imports and exports; 4. To achieve self-sufficiency in the production of raw materials. The Four-Year Plan was extended into World War Two. To force through success Goering was quite prepared to use slave labor. He later tried to justify ordering the use of what he called “forced labor” at the Nuremberg Trials when he said that he believed that Germany was fighting for its very existence and therefore any measures that could help Germany to survive were, by their very nature, acceptable.

Consists of directives for organizing the Four-Year Plan, with estimates of labor needed from civilian prisoners, foreign workers, and POWs; a 1936 memorandum from Hitler about German foreign policy, including preparation for war with the Soviet Union, "Lebensraum," and ascriptions of collective Jewish responsibility for economic crimes; information about Göring's conferences with military commanders and the Agriculture Ministry regarding increasing food production for Germany from the Occupied Territories; records about Göring's orders on forced mobilization of the male and female population, the confiscation of food and animals, and the organization of new industry in Occupied Territories; reports on the growth of the partisan movement in the Ukraine; statistics on German losses from partisans in the Ukraine and Belarus; information about Göring's conferences regarding overall military actions in the Occupied Territories; and several 1943 reports on the Four-Year Plan, fighting partisans, and on partisan activities (apparently translations from German into Russian). Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.