International Executive Bureau of the International League Against Racism and Antisemitism, Paris

Bureau exécutif international de la Ligue Internationale contre le racisme et anti-sémitisme, Paris (Fond 98)

11 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

20,911 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The International League against Racism and Antisemitism (La Ligue internationale contre le racisme et l'antisémitisme (LICA) was founded in 1928 in Paris by Bernard Lecache and Pierre Parf. LICA is one of the oldest antiracism associations in the world. In 1934, its members numbered 8-10,000, and in 1938, 32,000. LICRA was the organization that took the most radical positions with regard to French and German antisemitism. Its representatives engaged street clashes with anti-Semitic groups and boycotted firms that did businesses with the Nazi Germany. LICA rejected the “policy of silence” practiced by the Consistory and other leading Jewish organizations. Beside individual members, the league included 60 institutional members; political parties, unions, and other organization that participated in its activities.

This collection contains the organization's rules and statutes in addition to circulars, protocols, reports, lists of organization members, preparations for conferences and congresses, measures relating to a boycott of German goods and the struggle against holding the Olympic games in Germany, information about activities in various countries, reports on the situation of Jews in various countries, financial documents, newsletters, news clippings, and published material. The collection also features the International Federation's voluminous correspondence with national committees and with other societies and organizations: the Union of Jewish Communities of France, the World Union against Racism, the Canadian Jewish Congress, and the Anti-Nazi league, the World Union for Peace, the World Jewish Congress, and the Jewish community of Istanbul. Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.