Lillian Levy papers

box

1

Lillian Levy (1913-1986) served as Bureau Chief in Washington D.C. for the National Jewish Post and Opinion, the largest Jewish weekly in the United States. She wrote for the Jewish Post on a number of topics, including international affairs, civil rights, and other matters of Jewish interest. Levy was a member of the State Department Correspondents Association and the Women’s National Press Club. From 1960-1962, she covered the Adolf Eichmann trial in Jerusalem. Around that same time, she also wrote freelance pieces on the topic of former Nazi medical doctors still practicing medicine in Germany as well as articles about anti-Semitism in West Germany.

The Lillian Levy papers consists primarily of articles and correspondence written by Levy from the period of 1960-1963, as she worked as she served as the Bureau Chief for the National Jewish Post and Opinion. The majority of the articles she wrote during this time cover the topic of ex-Nazi medical doctors who performed experiments on Jewish prisoners during World War II. These doctors were able to escape trial and continued to practice medicine in Germany. Levy’s correspondence from this time is mostly to publications requesting to run her articles, but also included is a letter to First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy in 1963. She covered the Adolf Eichmann trial in Jerusalem, and included is her summary of Attorney General Gideon Hausner’s speech, and copies of evidence presented by the Police d’Israel in the conviction of Eichmann. In addition, the Lillian Levy papers contains publications Levy collected that are related to the topics she was writing on during this time and her notes. The Lillian Levy papers consists primarily of articles and correspondence written by Lillian Levy from the period of 1960-1963, a reporter who wrote on topics including the Adolf Eichmann trial and former Nazi medical practitioners in Germany. Also included are publications and news bulletins relating to the material Levy was writing on, and her notes. The first series contains articles written by Levy between 1960 and 1961. The majority of these articles covers the topics of former Nazi medical doctors that went on to continue practicing medicine after World War II. Many of these doctors performed grotesque experiments on Jewish prisoners, and despite trials finding them guilty, later returned to treating patients. Series two is correspondence created by Lillian Levy between 1960 and 1963. Most of the correspondence are letters inquiring to run her articles in various publications. Also included is a letter to First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy in 1963, requesting assistance in bringing Nina Iwanska to the United States for medical treatment from wounds she received while in the concentration camps. Series three contains documents from Levy’s time covering the Adolf Eichmann trial. Incuded are Attorney General Gideon Hausner’s speech in Hebrew, copies of evidential documents produced by the Police d’Israel for the trial, and Levy’s written summary of Hausner’s speech. Series four contains various publications and news bulletins covering topics related to Levy’s work on anti-Semitism in West Germany and former Nazi medical doctors. Series five contains Levy’s handwritten notes.