Out with the Jewish Haggling System

Antisemitic poster by Mjölnir depicting a German store owner kicking out a Jewish trader

overall: Height: 24.625 inches (62.548 cm) | Width: 37.375 inches (94.933 cm)

The poster was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 1993 by Alex Kertesz.

Hans Schweitzer (1901-1980) was born in Berlin, and joined the Nazi party in 1926. As a member of the party, Schwietzer created cartoons, caricatures, and political posters under the penname, Mjölnir. He worked for several Nazi newspapers, including the Völkischer Beobachter (The People’s Observer) and a paper published by early Nazi leaders Gregor and Otto Strasser. With his artistic talents, Schweitzer advanced through the party. He was appointed as an honorary member of the SS and became friends with Joseph Goebbels, Reich Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda. Later, Schweitzer illustrated several books for Goebbels, including Die Verfluchten Hakenkreuzen, published in 1930. Throughout the 1930s, Schweitzer created images for Nazi antisemitic, political, and election posters. He was also a cartoonist for the paper Der Angriff (The Attack), publish by Goebbels, and illustrated the book, Kampf um Berlin (Fight for Berlin). In 1935, he was appointed as Representative for Artistic Design and worked in conjunction with the Ministry of Propaganda for the creation of exhibitions, erection of monuments, and the development of insignia and national symbols. Later, he worked with a commission to decide how to utilize artwork stolen from Nazi victims. Schweitzer was arrested by American authorities in 1947 and fined 500 deutsche marks for his actions during the Holocaust. In 1955, he had his Nazi record expunged and was able to work as an illustrator and teacher.

German antisemitic propaganda poster encouraging Germans to fight against unfair Jewish business practices, designed by Hans Schweitzer (Mjőlnir). The poster features an image of an Aryan businessman standing in the doorway of a storefront called “German Business” who has just kicked out a Jewish peddler, symbolizing that German businesses will longer deal with Jews. The peddler is dressed all in black with a stereotypical dark and curly beard, payot, and a hooked nose. He is portrayed with yellow skin, a symbol of cowardice, betrayal, and ill health, to emphasize the antisemitic trope of his untrustworthy nature. The Nazis used propaganda to push the narrative that haggling Jewish traders were bad for German business and society. Nazi propaganda won the support of millions of Germans, affirmed Nazi ideas of racial superiority, and created an atmosphere that tolerated violence against Jews. They communicated their propaganda through art, music, film, radio, books, posters, and other published materials. Hans Schweitzer, who used the pen name Mjőlnir, was friends with Reich Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, Joseph Goebbels, and created many posters for the Nazi Party. In 1935, he was appointed as Representative for Artistic Design and worked in conjunction with the Ministry of Propaganda for the creation of exhibitions, erection of monuments, and the development of insignia and national symbols. Later he worked with a commission to decide how to utilize artwork stolen from Nazi victims.