German Newsreel selections

Trieste (Monfalcone), Laying the keel for the first of two cruisers to be built for the Royal Thailand Navy in St. Marks Shipyards. The Bishop of Trieste officiates. Present: The Minister of Thailand, members of the commission, the Prefect of Trieste and other civic authorities. The launching from the Monfalcone shipyard of the 2nd unit of the mercantile fleet of Italy, the motorship "Vettor Pisani". Godmother was the wife of the Prefect of Fiume. It was blessed by the Archbishop of Goriza. Venezia, A visit to Venice by Goebbels, the Reich Minister of Propaganda. Mostly LS, at night, Piazza San Marco, throngs of people. San Marco in spotlights, big "torches." The crowd gives a tumultuous welcome to Goebbels, the representative of a friendly nation, who appears together with His Excellency Alfieri on the center balcony of the royal palace. After his salute to the Duce, delivered in perfect Italian, Goebbels, accompanied by Minister Alfieri entered the piazza to mingle with the elegant cosmopolitan crowds. Various CUs of people at cafe tables, women and men. Goebbels at table enjoying himself. Various men in white uniforms, with swastika armbands. Ostentatious women with jewels, spaghetti straps, backless dresses. A day later, the fishermen of Chioggia with their deep-sea fishing boats, light boats, pointed scows, amusement boats, an array of 411 units offers an interesting water spectacle to the German guests, embarked with the Minister of Popular Culture and some other notables on Count Vaipi's yacht. Scenes of Venezia, San Giorgio, sunset, at night. Rome, Luncheon tendered by the Italian Government to members of the Japanese military mission. Among those present: Italian Undersecretary of War General Pariani; Admiral Baron Osuni, head of the mission; General Taranchi?; Mr. Izaka-uno, one of the best know Japanese industrialists; and members of the Italian and Japanese Armed Forces. Manchukuo, Effects of new Soviet policy. Meeting at the Manchukuoan border of Soviet and Japanese officers to discuss terms for a truce. Helsinki, Results of Soviet air raids. Hundreds of victims among civilian population. Bombed buildings, hospitals, etc. Finland, The Finnish Front where 30,000 Finns oppose the Reds' advance. When Finns are forced to withdraw, they apply the scorched earth policy to their homes.