Heimer family papers

box

1

Rolf (Ralph, 1921-2001) and Heinz (Henry, 1919-1984) Heimer were born in Vienna to Dr. Oskar Heimer and Irene Ziegler Heimer. They immigrated to the United States in June 1938, lived with their maternal uncle (Julius Ziegler) and his family in New York City, and then found their own rented room in Washington Heights. Oskar and Irene moved to Brünn (Brno) in September 1938 to live with relatives, were deported to Theresienstadt in December 1941, and perished.

The Heimer family papers consist of biographical materials, correspondence, and photographs documenting the Heimer family from Vienna, Henry and Ralph Heimer’s immigration to the United States in 1938, their parents’ relocation to Brno and efforts to emigrate, and return trips to Austria and Czechoslovakia by one of the brothers in the late 1960s. Biographical materials include Henry Heimer’s bicycle touring club membership card, Austrian passport, calling cards, university student identification card and registration booklet, tax clearance certificate, and immigrant identification card (photocopy); Henry and Ralph Heimer’s Holland‐America Line steamship ticket; and Ralph Heimer’s certificate of naturalization. Correspondence primarily consists of letters, postcards, and telegrams from Oskar and Irene Heimer in Vienna and Brno to their sons in New York describing their efforts to emigrate, relating news of family and friends who remained in Europe or had emigrated, and encouraging Henry and Ralph not to worry about them. A handful of letters and postcards from Henry and Ralph to their parents describe their travels and their lives in America. A few letters from Henry to Ralph document his American military training. Additional letters, postcards, and telegrams from family members and friends in Austria, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, Hungary, Israel, Luxembourg, and Portugal relate news. Correspondence from the American Consulate General in Prague, the State Department, and the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee as well as drafts of letters to American officials by Henry further document the family’s efforts to bring Oskar and Irene to the United States. Photographs depict the Heimer family, their Ziegler and Heimer relatives, and friends in Europe and the United States. Additional photographs document visits by either Henry or Ralph Heimer to Vienna, Hietzing, Brno, Lubochna, Moravské Budějovice, and Paris in the late 1960s.