Walter H. Rothschild papers

boxes

oversize box

oversize folder

2

1

1

Walter H. Rothschild (b. 1912) was born in Frankfurt, Germany to Carl and Alice Rothschild. In 1936 Walter immigrated to the United States, followed by his parents in 1938. Walter was drafted into the U.S. Army, trained at Camp Ritchie, and served with the 179th Infantry Regiment of the 45th Infantry Division. During his time as an Intelligence Officer stationed in Germany he returned to Frankfurt after its bombing. He wrote two letters about the devastation in Frankfurt and the emotions of returning to see everything destroyed. For his service, Walter was awarded the Bronze Star Medal, Croix de Guerre, European Theater Medal, and Combat Infantryman Badge. Walter later married Erna and had two children, Lawrence and Carol. They lived in Long Island, New York.

The Walter H. Rothschild papers includes biographical material, correspondence, publications, and photographs relating to Walter’s experience as a United States Intelligence Officer stationed in Germany, as well as material documenting Carl and Alice Rothschild’s immigration to the United States. The collection also includes Nazi government correspondence, political testaments, requests from Nazi prisoners of war, and photographs of Nazi officials and events. Biographical materials include documentation of Walter Rothschild’s service in the military through Army qualifications, appointment letters, letters of appreciation, and his discharge certificate. Emigration and immigration materials include documentation of marriage and packing lists for Carl Rothschild and Alice Rothschild in preparation for immigrating to the United States in 1938. Rothschild family correspondence includes two wartime letters from Walter Rothschild about his experience returning to Frankfurt as a United States officer after the bombing of Frankfurt. Also included in this series are the correspondence, research files, and a copy of the article Zwei Briefe aus Frankfurt am Main zur Stunde Null, by Sabine Hock, about Walter’s letters. The correspondence is between Sabine and Walter’s son, Lawrence. Publications include newspapers and clippings documenting the end of the war, air dropped safe conduct papers for a peaceful surrender by German soldiers, wartime pamphlets encouraging support of the war, Seventh U.S. Army headquarters menus and holiday program, and empty envelopes with hand drawn illustrations sent by Hendrik Willem van Loon. Nazi government papers include a signed political testament naming Hermann Göring successor to Adolf Hitler, birthday and holiday wishes from Hitler to high ranking officials, the Knights Cross of the Iron Cross award, requests for supplies from high ranking Nazi prisoners of war, correspondence from Nazi officials and sympathizers, and a letter of reprimand for violations of the uniform code. Nazi officials andprisoners of war in the series include Julius Schab, Albert Speer, General Breith, Rudolf Bogatsch, Adolf Hitler, Hermann Göring, Erwin Rommel, Heinrich Himmler, and Claus Schilling. Subject files include draft speeches from the Bavaria station Action for Freedom and menus from the Park Hotel and Kampfgruppe Breunschwig. Photographic materials consist of personal and military wartime photographs taken during Walter’s service in the military and photographs from the Signal Corps. The series also includes photographs taken by Nazi photographers, including Heinrich Hoffman, of Nazi officials, the 1936 Olympics, musical performances, and various other gatherings and meetings. Included in the images are Adolf Hitler, Henrich Himmler, and Hermann Göring.