Propaganda; Soviet POWs

A German propaganda poster depicts a tank with a Nazi flag/swastika banner in the background. It reads, in Russian, "Growing every day." Another propaganda poster depicts a German soldier in the foreground, turning back to face local peasants, who are standing behind him and waving to him. It reads, again in Russian, "The German Army, your protector and friend!" A third propaganda poster shows a farmer tending to his field, and reads: "Now, I work in peace". A fourth poster shows a farmer planting seeds, but the caption is illegible, as the time code was burned in on top of it in a moment of dazzling brilliance. 01:31:47 VS, CU, MCU, MS of Soviet POWs who are put to work in a German factory receiving suits and shoes. VS, POWs being fitted for suits, smiling. VS, POWs sitting on a bench trying on shoes, continue to smile for the camera. Walking in front of shop window and bowing. Translation of Russian narration: Not only the entire German military industry, but that of the whole of Europe is now working to arm the front that stretches from the Arctic Ocean to the Black Sea. Thousands of tanks, airplanes, and various kinds of guns, millions of shells, rifles, and missiles are flowing from factories, plants, and workshops to the front lines. In the arms of skilled German soldiers, in the arms of his companions, among whom there are already tens of thousands of Russian people, this armor turns into a threatening weapon pointed at the Bolsheviks. Between you and your enemy - the Bolsheviks - the German army is standing. And peaceful work is possible only under its protection. The turmoil of war has gone. It swept away collective farm slavery; got rid of greedy commissars, Party officials, and sly Jews feeding on people's sweat and blood. And a peasant who early in the morning goes into a field knows that this is his land that he works on, and that the fruit of his work belongs to him, and that he can work peacefully at last. Each furrow, each hand of seeds put into the soil, everything serves a higher purpose that inspires all liberated Russian people, it serves for the restoration of our homeland economy. Many Russians, Ukrainians, Byelorussians, and other Eastern Europeans who were forced to mobilization by the Bolsheviks and later on taken as prisoners of the war, have been freed for their good behavior and are now making their path to start their usual work. Right now we can see a group of former prisoners at one of the Berlin stores who are purchasing civil clothes for themselves. Tomorrow they will start their usual work according to their civil profession.