Selected records of the United Nations War Crimes Commission. Polish Delegate to the Commission of United Nations for War Crimes

United Nations War Crimes Commission. Delegat Polski do Komisji Narodów Zjednoczonych do Spraw Zbrodni Wojennych (Sygn. GK 161)

1,977 digital images, PDF

1 CD,

Instytut Pamięci Narodowej-Komisja Ścigania Zbrodni przeciwko Narodowi Polskiemu

The United Nations War Crimes Commission was established at a meeting held at the Foreign Office in London on October 20, 1943. The Commission, operating from a secretariat in London, consisted of government representatives appointed by the 17 member countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, France, Greece, India, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the United Kingdom, the United States and Yugoslavia. The first official meeting took place on January 11, 1944, and the Commission continued its activities until the end of March 1948, and was dissolved in May of that year. In addition to the main commission, a separate Far Eastern sub-commission was established at the suggestion of the Chinese ambassador.This sub-commission was initially based in Chongqing, and later, Nanjing, operating from November 1944 until March 1947. The primary activities of the Commission were to identify and prepare lists of alleged war criminals, and to help establish the legal machinery used by the member countries to apprehend, bring to trial and prosecute war criminals.

This collection contains Polish, British and American regulations concerning the research, investigation and judgement of war criminals. Voluntary testimonies of SS-Gruppenführer, Jakub Sporrenberg and SS-Hauptsturmführer, Fridel Rau concerning their activities in Lublin and other occupied territories, the case of soap making in the Institute of Anatomy in Gdańsk, protection of objects of art and archival objects stolen in Poland by Germans, Germanization of Polish children, the camp of Płaszów, texts of Polish “claims” in the case of Nazi war criminals, a copy of verdict by the court in Krakow versus Michał Weichert.