Jack Zimmermann papers

folder

1

Jack Zimmermann (born Janek Zimmermann) was born on April 16, 1932 in Przemyśl, Poland and had a sister, Cesia (b. 1929). His father, Wilhelm Zimmermann was a salesman and his mother, Malwina Schechter Zimmermann, took care of the children. Przemyśl was under Soviet administration from September 1939 until June 28, 1941. A ghetto was established in Przemyśl in July 1942 and more than 12,000 Jews were deported to the Bełżec death camp. In November of 1942 another 4,000 Jews were deported to Bełżec, including Wilhelm. The ghetto was divided into two sections: Section A for those who were employed and Section B for those who were unemployed. Malwina Zimmermann and her two children were placed in Section B which meant deportation to a death camp. At that time, Malwina befriended Dr. Hirsch who agreed to pay for a place in hiding for the Zimmermann family. They were hidden by Stefania and Helena Podgórski along with ten other Jews. Przemyśl was liberated by the Soviet Army in June 1944. Malwina and her two children left Poland in 1945, aided by the Bricha, traveled via Prague, Czechoslovakia and Munich to the Landsberg DP camp. They stayed there until February 1949 when they immigrated to the United States aboard the SS Marine Tiger. Malwina, Jack, and Cesia were in hiding with Muniek Diamant (now Burzminski), Henek Diamant (Muniek’s brother), Danuta (last name unknown, later wife of Henek Diamant), Sala Hirsch, Monek Hirsch (Sala’s husband), Dr. Schillinger, Dziunia Schillinger (Dr. Schillinger’s daughter), Dr. Hirsch, Sionek Hirsch (Dr. Hirsch’s son), and Janek Dorlich.

The papers consist of pre-war photographs of the Zimmermann family in Przemyśl, Poland and post-war photographs of Malwina Zimmermann, Jack Zimmermann, and Cesia Zimmermann at the displaced persons camp in Landsberg am Lech, Germany and of the Zimmermann family after they immigrated to the United States in 1949. Also included is a certificate from the ORT-UNRRA trade school in Landsberg for Jack, a driver's license issued to Jack in Landsberg, and a letter sent to Jack from Mulke, in 1948.