French, Yugoslavian and Greek campaigns

R.2 Members of the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler consult a map then move into Vichy, France. Tanks and soldiers in the streets. French colonial POWs, some wearing turbans. Fighting at the airport in Clermont-Ferrand, which was taken in a few hours. French army officers speak to members of the Leibstandarte. The Germans inspect the planes on the field. They march into Clermont-Ferrand to put down the last resistance. They knock on doors and inspect peoples' papers in the streets. Panning shot of a large crowd of French POWs, which the narrator describes as a "whole infantry regiment who laid down their arms without fighting." Good shots of crowds of civilians and Germans in the streets. Sepp Dietrich speaks to a smiling French woman. Dietrich studies a map with a member of the SS Leibstandarte. Tanks roll down the street. 01:44:00 good shot of a death's head flag flying from a tank. Views of Metz shot from the air. Pan past the cathedral and over a large group of members of the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler standing at attention in a parade ground. Sept. 3, 1940. Himmler arrives to visit the Leibstandarte. Himmler reviews the troops. Good CUs of the soldiers. Himmler shakes hands with one of the troops in front of a Leibstandarte SS standard. The Leibstandarte members march down the streets of Metz. Actions of the Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler in southeastern Europe in March 1941. After a 10 day journey on the Danube, the troops reach the border of Bulgaria on a barge. Motorcycle troops reach the border of Yugoslavia, the staging area for the invasion of Yugoslavia and Greece. In a Bulgarian village, the troops are shown enjoying a last few days of calm before the battle. A man herds a flock of sheep. German troops eat, shave and write letters home. A photo of a woman sits beside one of these letters. Shirtless soldiers play cards. R.3 Greek (? or Yugoslavian) POWs march down a road. Sepp Dietrich crosses the Albanian border and meets with Italian General Rossi. The Germans and the Italians greet each other and drink a toast. Rossi and Dietrich smile and shake hands while a German officer points out locations on a map. After the capture of the Gulf of Patras, the men of the SS Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler commandeer a few small fishing boats to travel to the opposite shore. These boats were the only two that weren't taken by the enemy or destroyed. Shots of the men and vehicles on the boats. The narrator states that the enemy was taken by complete surprise. Germans in motorcycles with sidecars speed along the beach and then the road. They meet up with German paratroopers. The narrator says that part of the Leibstandarte will go towards Athens. CU on a road sign indicating the direction of Athens. Members of the unit at the Acropolis. Heavy music and shots of the Acropolis as the narrator says, "The Southeastern campaign is over."