David Wisnia songs written in Auschwitz (Oswiecim)

folder

1

David Wisnia was born in 1926 in Sochaczew, Poland to Elijah and Machla Wisnia. He had two brothers Moshe and Dov Berela. His father owned a furniture upholstery business in Warsaw, Poland. David’s father inspired his love of music, and he started performing at a young age. In 1937 the family moved to Warsaw. In 1941 David was prevented from returning to the Warsaw ghetto and he went to Sochaczew. His entire family were murdered in the ghetto. In fall 1942 he was deported to Auschwitz-Birkenau. He lied about his age in order to go with the men selected for work. He was assigned to collection the bodies of prisoners who committed suicide. After it was discovered that he could sing, David was made an assistant to the stubendienst. While in Auschwitz-Birkenau, David was able compose and write lyrics to four songs. The lyrics were smuggled out of the camp in a metal can by Wisnia's friend, Isaiah Kalfus, during the evacuation of the camp. In December 1944 he was sent on a death march to the Gleiwitz subcamp, and then put on a train to Dachau. He was put on another train from Dachau from which he escaped. He was rescued by the 101st Airborne Division. He joined the 506th Parachute Infantry and experienced combat with them during the end of the war. After the war, David immigrated to the United States and first settled in New York where he met his wife. They later moved to New Jersey where he served as Cantor for Har Sinai Hebrew Congregation. He later moved to Levittown, Pennsylvania. David published his memoirs in 2015 under the title One voice, two lives: from Auschwitz prisoner to 101st Airborne trooper.

Consists of the handwritten lyrics to four songs: "Oświęcim" (in Polish), "Oświęcim" (in Yiddish), "Mendele" (in Polish), and "Schweig, Herzele, Schweig" (in Yiddish), written by David Wisnia while imprisoned in the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp. The lyrics were smuggled out of the camp in a metal can by Wisnia's friend, Isaiah Kalfus, during the evacuation of the camp. Also includes sheet music for "Oświęcim" written in 1984, as well as an audiocassette of the songs.