White drawstring blouse with cufflinks worn by a Polish Jewish girl with an assumed identity

overall: Height: 21.125 inches (53.658 cm) | Width: 14.875 inches (37.783 cm)

The blouse was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 2010 by Renia Sperber Perel.

Renia Sperber was born on December 2, 1930, in Malnow, Poland (Malinovka, Ukraine), to George (Getzel) and Freda Keltz Sperber. Georg was born on December 27, 1895, in Mosciska. Freda was born circa 1893 in Malnow to Hersh and Sarah Schwannenfeld Kelz, and had 4 siblings, all emigrating to the US before the war. Reina’s sister, Henia, was born in 1928, and a brother, David, was born in 1933. The Sperber’s had a farm and owned a general store. It was a comfortable, religious household. Renia spoke Polish, Ukrainian, and Yiddish and had private lessons in German and Hebrew. In September 1939, Malnow was occupied by the Soviet Union. In June 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Union. Soon after, four Ukrainian youths broke into the house and beat Renia’s father with rubber hoses; he never recovered from the injuries. It was a summer of fear and the family hid in nearby fields and barns. Their house was taken by a neighbor, Frankiw Yurko. All Jews were ordered to report to Mosciska. They had heard of the killings that took place there: her paternal grandmother Tzirl, uncle and wife, Ayzik and Balcia, and their four children, had been shot. Renia’s parents decided to send the sisters to Germany under false identities as non-Jewish Ukrainian laborers. Freda’s friend, Kaska Kozowa, gave Renia a birth certificate in her daughter’s name, Marja. Another friend, Ivan Panylyk, obtained false papers for Henia, identifying her as Pelagia Halakjo. The Jews of Malnow were killed or deported by December. The girls hid in the Panylyk home until Ivan took them to the train station on December 4th. They went to Lwow where all arrivals were interrogated by Ukrainian collaborators. Renia saw Jewish women dragged away for pretending to be non-Jewish Poles or Ukrainians. The girls separated to avoid suspicion. Renia was asked to cross herself, and when she did, was allowed to pass. They were loaded on cattle cars and, after six weeks with no food and water, arrived on January 16th in Metz, in occupied France. They were ordered to undress, sprayed with DDT, and sorted. Renia and Henia were sent to the Lampertsmuhle textile factory, near Kaiserslautern, Germany. Renia worked in the weaving section with a young woman from the train, Kaska Lazar. Food was one slice of bread and a ladle of sand-filled soup. By April, Renia’s stomach was swollen from semi-starvation. At some point, her sister received a coded letter from Ivan telling them their mother and brother had been killed. Nine year old David was working as a shepherd and the other boys undressed him to see if he was Jewish and circumcised. He was arrested and Freda, who was hiding in the Kalnikow forest, returned to be with him. They were shot and buried in Dubinka, in a location normally reserved for diseased animals. Kaska created an escape plan to include Renia, Henia, and another friend, Hanka Cholod. Kaska got them permits for a walk outdoors and on May 1, 1942, they walked outside the gates, went to the train station, and boarded a train. Kaska had long blonde hair and blue eyes, and the SS men on the train were not suspicious and just wanted to talk to her. They got off at Nienburg and found a convent where they were given food. While they were eating, the police arrived and they were put in prison. They were interrogated for a week, all saying that they had gone to relieve themselves during a train stop when the train left without them. The authorities decided to send them to work in separate farms in the Bremen region. Renia was sent to the farm of Rebecca Nustedt in Barrien bei Syke. She worked from sunup until late evening and her food had crushed flies and mice droppings. She began to menstruate and had severe cramps, but no knowledge of what was happening to her. She was never allowed to bathe and became so sick that she was sent to a doctor. He gave her purple crystals to wash with and she recovered. Kaska visited once or twice and told her that Henia was working on a farm in the region. In early 1945, the priest’s son, Otto, told her that “the Tommies are coming…they are closing in.” Bombs began to hit closer to the village. On April 8th, British and French troops arrived. The forced laborers gathered at a nearby farm and watched the farm owners raise white flags. There were German soldiers hiding in the nearby fields and there were gun battles. Renia lived in fear, not knowing if more Germans would arrive and recapture the area. She had appendicitis and was taken to an Allied military hospital. After she recovered, a Polish group took her to a camp in Dunsen, Germany, in the British zone, run by UNRRA, the United Nations relief agency. Her Polish was good and she stayed, afraid to be with Ukrainians. She kept her false identity. The camp was disorganized, as the Allies were not set up to handle the millions of refugees. They got canned goods from the Red Cross, but had no can openers. A Catholic priest set up classes to teach the refugees Latin, and asked Renia to convert. A Polish newsletter was started; Renia saw that for them, life was returning to normal. But she felt trapped in a world with no Jews and terrified that her true identity might be discovered. She often heard antisemitic comments in the camp, denouncing Jews as dirty and evil. In April 1946, Henia showed her a newsletter describing a recent massacre of Jews in Poland. They left for Krakow to find other Jewish people and joined Dror, a Zionist youth group. In June, Bricha transported them to the American Zone and a Jewish dp camp in Backnang. Renia was hospitalized and, upon returning, met Henia’s boyfriend, Izak Perel, and his brother, Morris (Moishe). Moishe was born in Mlawa, Poland, in 1921 and had work as forced labor in the Ural Mountains in Russia. Forty of his relatives were killed in the war. In spring 1948, Renia moved to an orphanage in Aglasterhausen to prepare for emigration. That September, she and Henia emigrated to Vancouver, Canada, and were placed in foster homes. Renia and Morris married on December 24, 1950 and had a daughter. Morris passed away, age 78, on November 29, 1999.

Freda Keltz was born circa 1893 in Malnow, Poland (Malinovka, Lvivska oblast, Ukraine), to Hersh and Sarah Schwannenfeld Keltz. It was a tight knit Jewish community made up of several small villages. She had four siblings: Esther, Chaya, Leon, and Jacob. Hersh died of heart failure in 1928 when Sarah was thirty-five years old. Esther and Chaya emigrated to the United States when they were teenagers and lived with their maternal aunt. Leon and Jacob followed a few years later. Freda married Georg (Getzel) Sperber, who was born on December 27, 1895, in Mosciska. They had three children: Henia, born in 1928, Renia, born in 1930, and David, born in 1933. They were part of a small group of Jews within a large Ukrainian farming community. The family had a small farm and owned a general store. They lived with Sarah in the same house in which Freda was raised. It was a religious household and they attended services in the prayer room of a village elder. A few weeks after Nazi Germany invaded Poland on September 1, 1939, Malnow, in eastern Poland, was occupied by the Soviet Union. In June 1941, Germany launched a surprise attack on Russia. Soon after this, four Ukrainian youths broke into the house and beat Georg with rubber hoses; he never fully recovered. It was a summer of fear and the family lived in hiding in fields and barns. Their house was taken by a neighbor, Frankiw Yurko. All Jews were ordered to report to Mosciska. They had heard of the killings that took place there: Freda’s mother-in-law Tzirl, and brother and sister-in-law, Ayzik and Balcia, and their four children, had gone as summoned and been shot. The family decided to send the two girls, ten year old Renia and thirteen year old Henia to Germany under false identities as non-Jewish Ukrainian laborers. Freda’s friend, Kaska Kozowa, gave Renia a birth certificate in her daughter’s name, Marja. Another friend, Ivan Panylyk, obtained false papers for Henia, identifying her as Pelagia Halakjo. The Jews of Malnow were killed or deported by December. Freda and the girls hid in the Panylyk home for four days waiting to leave. Freda decided to stay in Malnow with eight year old David. Renia and Henia left for Germany on December 4, 1941. Freda placed David with a family to work as a shepherd. She lived in hiding in the nearby Kalnikow forest. In 1942, the other village boys undressed David to see if he was Jewish and saw that he was circumcised. David was arrested and interrogated about the rest of his family. Freda returned to Malnow when David was arrested. They were both shot and their bodies were taken to Dubinka and buried in a location normally reserved for diseased animals.

Long sleeved v-neck blouse worn by 11 year old Renia Sperber when she escaped Malnow, Poland (Malinovka, Lvivska oblast, Ukraine), on December 4, 1941, with her 13 year old sister, Henia, following the invasion by Nazi Germany that June. The Perel's home was broken into by Ukrainians who beat their father, Georg, and the family lived in hiding throughout the summer. In December, Renia and Henia obtained false papers as non-Jewish Ukrainians and left for labor service in Germany. They were assigned to Lampersmuhle textile factory near Kaiserslautern, escaped, but were captured and sent to work on separate farms. The area was liberated on April 8, 1945, by British and French forces. After the war, Renia and Henia lived in a displaced persons camp for Poles in Dunsen, Germany, but kept their assumed identities because of antisemitism in the camp. Renia was lonely and afraid to be living in a world without Jews. They decided to leave and finally made their way to a Jewish dp camp in Backnang. In spring 1948, the sisters emigrated to Canada.