Benjamin B. Ferencz collection, Series 1-5

boxes

oversize boxes

book enclosures

oversize folders

70

4

2

5

Benjamin B. Ferencz was born in Șomcuta Mare, Romania (Nagysomkút, Hungary) on March 11, 1920, to Joseph and Sarah Ferencz. At the time, Șomcuta Mare was still part of Hungary but was occupied by Romania. The city was ceded to Romania under the Treaty of Trianon shortly after Benjamin’s birth, and the Ferencz family immigrated to the United States at the end of the same year. Benjamin Ferencz received a Bachelor of Science in Social Science from the City College of New York in 1940, and a law degree from Harvard Law School in 1943. Mr. Ferencz served in the U.S. Army from 1943-1945 and then held a variety of positions related to the Holocaust. Some of those positions included Executive Counsel, Office of the Chief of Counsel for War Crimes, Nuremberg, 1946-1948; Chief Prosecutor for the U.S. in the war crimes trial against Nazi extermination squads, 1947; Director General, Jewish Restitution Successor Organization, 1948-1956; Director of Operations, United Restitution Organization, Ltd., 1954-1956; Special Legal Advisor at Hague reparations negotiations, Germany-Israel, 1952; Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, 1953-1956; Counsel, International Council of B'nai B'rith, 1958-1961; Counsel, American Oeuvre de Secours aux Enfants, 1959-1961; and numerous other councils and conferences related to the Holocaust. He held the position of Adjunct Professor of International Law at Pace University in White Plains, NY, and is founder and Executive Director of the Peace Center. Ferencz is the author of numerous monographs, articles, and commentaries, primarily on matters of international law, the need for an international criminal court, and world peace. Mr. Ferencz married Gertrude Ferencz (née Fried) in 1946, and is father to four children; Carol, Robin, Donald, and Nina. Mr. Ferencz resides in New Rochelle, New York where he continues to strive for universal peace.

Series 1: Ferencz family biographical information, 1919-1993 Ferencz family biographical information includes correspondence, notes, scrapbooks, identification documents, reports, yearbooks, diaries, educational certificates, notebooks, and other records related to the private life, career, and professional development of Benjamin and Gertrude Ferencz. Notably, the series includes letters from Benjamin Ferencz to Gertrude Ferencz that detail the capture, interrogation, and investigation of Karl Haberstock, Hitler's personal art dealer. The letters describe the theft of billions of dollars in art treasures throughout Europe. Most files are arranged in chronological order, but the contents of the Day Files are arranged in reverse chronological order. Series 2: War crimes trials and war crimes related records, 1945-1994 The series includes, but is not limited to correspondence, notes, scrapbooks, newspaper clippings, identification documents, essays, memoranda, reports, photographs, and other records related to war crimes in general, and the Einsatzgruppen war crimes trial in particular. The series includes transcript volumes from the Nuremberg Trials. The collection is chiefly related to Benjamin B. Ferencz's involvement in the Einsatzgruppen trial. Most files are arranged in chronological order. Series 3: B'nai B'rith records, 1937-1994 The series includes, but is not limited to correspondence, newspaper clippings, memoranda, notes, essays, reports, and other documents pertaining to Benjamin B. Ferencz's professional association with B'nai B'rith. Primarily, the material concerns the efforts of Ferencz to obtain restitution for real, material, and capital property lost by B'nai B'rith during World War II. Series 4: Claims against industrial firms records, 1952-1994 The series includes, but is not limited to notes, correspondence, memoranda, telegrams, reports, and other documents related to Benjamin B. Ferencz's legal representation of individual and group claims brought against German industrial firms after World War II. Primarily, the material concerns the efforts of Ferencz to obtain restitution for slave laborers from the German industrial firms which forcibly employed them. Series 5: Slave labor related records, 1957-1994 The series consists of correspondence related to Benjamin B. Ferencz's efforts to obtain restitution for slave laborers employed by Nazi industrial firms during the war. The series also includes notes, drafts, research materials, annotated copies, and other materials related to the publication of Benjamin B. Ferencz's monograph, "Less Than Slaves".