Association of survivors of the Nazi Persecution in Argentina. Archive of Sherit Hapleitá of the Moskovits Archive

Asociación de Sobrevivientes de la Persecución Nazi en la Argentina. Archivo de Sherit Hapleitá del Archivo Moskovits

745 digital images, TIFF

Yiṿo in Argenṭine

The Sherit Hapleitá-Association of Survivors of the Nazi Persecution in Argentina was established after WWII to rebuild life of the Holocaust survivors and to honor memory of their relatives killed by Nazism. The association’s initial mission was to share survivors memories, support each other, honor their murdered families and make their voices heard in a society unknown and unwilling to listen to them. They shared the nostalgia for the lost, their places of origin, the common sufferings and also the dreams of their new life. In the search, almost always unsuccessful, of their lost relatives, they found in their peers, support and mutual support. A second stage of the association, after the first months of adaptation, was the participation and organization of the first commemorative events of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, both in the Jewish Cemetery of La Tablada and in public spaces that brought together hundreds of survivors and their families. In later years they dedicated themselves to transmitting and giving testimonies, and represented to the society the survivors of the Nazi persecution. Sherit Hapleitá promotes the commemoration of May 8, 1945, Day of the Capitulation of Nazi Germany, when the German army signed the surrender.

Records from the legal office of Mr. José Moskovits, a Holocaust survivor and attorney in Buenos Aires. Consist of the manifesto, correspondence and publications of the Sherit Hapleita in Argentina collected by José Moskovits. Includes correspondence, letters to the Minister of Defense in Cuba, Raul Castro, office files, press releases, printed material, as well as project folders related to memorial events in Argentina and other activities of Holocaust survivors.