NSDAP / SA and political activities

Following "Der Kampf geht weiter!" [The Struggle Goes on!] title, this propaganda documentary depicts the efforts of the NSDAP and SA to organize political activities. Special occasions are indicated by intertitles. 07:01:13 Title cards read: "Hitler's Kampf um Deutschland," "Der Film ist hergestelli von der Landesfilmstelle Hessen, Hessen-Nassau," "An der Camera: Pg. Frank Hensel," "Verleih: Pg. Frank Hensel Frankfurt a. M.," "Erster Teil," "Ein Feiertag in Hessen- Nassau" [Holiday in Hessen-Nassau], "Leitung: Gauleiter Sprenger," and "Vor der Zwingburg des Kapitalismus." 07:02:02 Nazi soldiers stand in formation along the side of a road. Soldiers climb onto trucks and children watch nearby. Title card states, "Weiter geht der Kampf." Nazi soldiers parade down the street, some holding flags bearing a swastika. They raise their arms in a Hitler salute. People standing on the sidewalk salute in return. 07:04:05 Title: "Rast" and soldiers stand around a large steaming cauldron with a swastika painted on its side. They are all gathered together and some smile at the camera while others talk amongst themselves. A man dishes food out from the pot. 07:05:10 Title card states, "Seit 2 Tagen in der Gluthitze." Soldiers march down the street and people stand by and watching and holding Nazi banners. Title, "Kramer spricht im Westerwald" [Field trip to the Westerwald]. A large group of men are gathered in a room, a man stands on a platform and speaks, Nazi soldiers are piled on trucks, and a sizeable crowd assembles in a city square. 07:06:03 Motorists escort cars and trucks down the street. Nazi soldiers wave, salute, and fly flags from the passing vehicles. 07:07:20 Text reads, "Gautag in Braunschweig/Hannover - Braunschweig der NSDAP / am 21. & 22. Febr. 1931." A mass of people crowd together for a regional Nazi party meeting in Braunschweig on February 21-22, 1931. A band plays and Nazi flags hang from trumpets. Panning shot of packed crowd as some people extend their arms in a Nazi salute and others wave. 07:08:32 "Treten zum Essentassen" Nazi soldiers stand in lines waiting for food. Panning shot of soldiers and a few women standing around with plates, eating, looking at the camera and waving. Adolf Hitler stands by a car and talks with officials. 07:09:34 Text states, "dem Schlossplatz nah Adolf Hitler den Vorbeimarsch ab." Nazi soldiers march in a parade for Hitler. They pass by saluting him and carrying Nazi flags.