Marcel Wolf Zyto papers

box

oversize folders

1

2

Marcel Wolf Zyto (1923-2010) was born in Paris on May 30, 1923 to Polish immigrants Jakob (Jacob) and Sima (Syma, née Finkelstein) Zyto. He had one brother, Henri, and one sister, Henriette, who died in early childhood and was buried in their native Poland. The Zyto family lived in the 20th district in Paris, and as a teenager Marcel studied to be a pharmacy assistant, receiving a diploma in 1939. During the German occupation of France, a neighboring friend named Jean-Jacques Rothstein persuaded him to flee to the town of Donnemarie-en-Montois (Seine-et-Marne, now Donnemarie-Dontilly), where he assumed the false identity “Marcel Benoît” and joined the resistance. His parents survived the war in hiding. Following the liberation of France in 1944, Marcel joined and served in the French Army, including in the forces that occupied Germany. Marcel immigrated to the United States aboard the SS Queen Mary in August 1947, sponsored by an uncle living in New York, and completed his education. He worked for Bristol Laboratories and married his wife, Muriel, in 1953. The couple had three daughters and lived in Japan and Hong Kong before returning to the United States in 1967 and settling in northern New Jersey. He died in North Caldwell, New Jersey, on May 19, 2010.

The Marcel Wolf Zyto papers include pre-war, wartime, and post-war biographical materials documenting Marcel Wolf Zyto, who survived the war living under the false name of Marcel or Pierre Benoît in France, as well as his parents and his sister. The collection also includes restitution files documenting Zyto’s efforts to receive restitution from the French, German, and Swiss governments, and subject files documenting Zyto’s autobiography, his support for a memorial plaque for Jean-Jacques Rothstein, and his search for his sister’s burial place. Jacob and Syma Zyto materials include copies and translations of their marriage certificate, Jacob’s nationalization certificate, a certificate from Marcel permitting Syma to sell their Paris apartment, and records provided by Marcel in support of his mother’s immigration to America. Many of the documents are photocopies. Marcel Wolf Zyto materials include his certificate of French nationality, reissued birth certificates, a certificate declaring that he refused to collaborate with the German occupiers, French passport and voter registration cards, correspondence about the status of his French citizenship in 1962, and notes for a 2006 speech. False identification papers include an identification card, ration book with tickets, calling card, work card, a service card for André Citroën, real estate and residence certificates, service requisition orders, and labor transfer notices, all in the name Marcel Pierre Benoît, Pierre Marcel Benoît, or Marcel Zito. Education records include identification cards, certificates, diplomas, documenting Zyto’s education in pharmaceuticals, factory management, and law in France and at University College and City College in New York. Employment records include certificates documenting Zyto’s work at La Grande Pharmacie Gambetta and Laboratoire de la “Gynaldene” as well as a clipping documenting his work at Wyeth International. French Army documents include certificates, identification papers, orders, permissions, and discharge and demobilization papers documenting Zyto’s military service in France. Immigration records include correspondence, affidavits, and financial documents. This series also includes a birth certificate for Henriette Zyto. Restitution files document Zyto’s efforts in the 1990s and 2000s to obtain restitution from the French government through the CIVS commission, the German government through the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, and Swiss government through the Swiss Fund for Needy Victims of the Holocaust and the Holocaust Victim Assets Litigation. Subject files include correspondence, printed materials, photographs, and copies of records documenting Zyto’s book Improbable Survival!, his support for the restoration of a memorial plaque for Jean-Jacques Rothstein in Paris, his research into his Polish family history, and his search for the burial place of his sister Henriette.