Robert Goldberg papers, 1943-1946

folders

oversize folder

9

1

Robert Goldberg (1924-1975) was a Private, First Class of the Military Government Section, Headquarter 4th Armored Division and 10th Armored Infantry Division. He elected to serve overseas, after completion of dentistry school at University of California, San Francisco. After the hostilities ended, Goldberg was tasked with assisting in the administrative responsibilities of the displaced persons (DP) camps. For the Pocking DP camp, Goldberg ordered and monitored supplies delivered to the camp. He was discharged from the Army in the winter of 1946.

The Robert Goldberg collection contains material collected and created by Robert Goldberg during his service in the U.S. Army during World War II, as well as his post-war experiences serving as an administrator in displaced persons camps. His primary responsibility was the monitoring and procurement of supplies for the Pocking displaced persons camp, and Included in the records are military orders and a notebook pertaining to the shipment of supplies. Goldberg’s papers include a typescript memoir, a letter to his family, clippings, and army directives and orders. His memoir details the administration of Pocking as a whole, and his letter home pleads to his uncle to get as many donations as possible to assist with the displaced persons problem in Eastern Europe. Also included are publications collected by Goldberg, including an “After Action” report for the 11th Armored Division and a newsletter titled "In fact." The Robert Goldberg collection contains material created and collected by Robert Goldberg during his time serving as a dentist during and after World War II. The military duty series consists of orders and forms collected by Goldberg, including authorization for travel to leave the U.S. occupied zones, a farewell party, and a supply train directive. Also included is a doctor’s caloric recommendation for feeding displaced persons, and a booklet monitoring supplies. The personal writings series consists of correspondence, notes, and a brief memoir written by Goldberg. The memoir gives insight into his position, as well as the administration of the Pocking DP camp. The correspondence written by Goldberg is to his uncle Morris, and describes the need for donations of any kind to the displaced people in Europe. His intent was for his uncle to pass the letter along to the Temple B’nai Israel in Sacramento California. The publications series contains two items, the copy of a weekly newsletter entitled In Fact, which had the goals of reporting on falsehoods in the press, and debunking popular myths of the time. In addition, in an oversized folder, is a G-2 After Action Report for the 11th Armored Division in April 1945. The report has a daily update on the status of the 11th Armored Division and general military news.