Homefront activities in Washington, DC

Castle Films was started in 1924 by Eugene W. Castle, the former Pacific Coast film editor at Fox Movietone News. Castle became a successful producer of industrial and advertising short subjects. Castle began compiling shorts, travelogues and newsreels for use in schools. The lure of the home movie market proved lucrative for Castle. In 1936, they became one of the first home movie companies to actually sell their product to the general public. In 1937, Castle started Castle Films News Parade, a sort of "newscast" one could view at home rather than at the theater. In 1946, Castle Films became a division of United World Films, which in turn was absorbed by Universal in 1947. In the 1970s, Castle Films became Universal 8. Public domain status confirmed by NBC Universal.

News documentary with intertitles and English narration produced for the home movie market by Castle Films Productions. "The News Parade" 1942. "Washington in Wartime" Street scenes in Washington, DC and the Lincoln Memorial. Civilians mixed with soldiers and war workers. President Roosevelt at Union Station. Secretary of State Cordell Hull greets foreign statesmen. U.S. Information Building. US Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr. gives short speech Bureau of Engraving and Printing. Donald M. Nelson- Office of Personnel Management. Paul V. McNutt- War Manpower Commission. War Department- General George C. Marshall, Chief of the General Staff and Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson (4:20) Frank Knox, Secretary of the Navy. Commander in Chief of U.S. Fleet, Admiral Ernest Joseph King. Price Administrator Leon Henderson. U.S. Commissioner of Education Dr. J.W. Studebaker. Department of Agriculture.(5:55) Department of State and Cordell Hul. Government employees at work and U.S. Congress. The White House, Marvin McIntyre and Steven Early, Executive Assistants. (8:10) President Roosevelt and his cabinet Winston Churchill. Awarding Congressional Medal of Honor to General James Doolittle. (9:39) Film ends.