Shoshannah Gallowski Fine papers

box

1

Shoshannah Gallowski Fine, a welfare officer with the Jewish relief unit of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committiee, worked with the Jewish orphans liberated from Theresienstadt from 1945 to 1947. She worked with unaccompanied children from 1947 to1948 at Kloster Indersdorf (Kibbuz Dror) near Dachau, Germany.

The Shoshannah Gallowski Fine papers consist of Allied Expeditionary Forces Displaced Persons (A.E.F D.P.) registration records, administrative records, correspondence, photographs, and printed materials documenting Fine's work with orphaned Jewish children and displaced persons at Kloster Indersdorf (Kibbutz Dror) and in Great Britain after the Holocaust. The papers also contain addresses given by Leonard G. Montefiore relating to Jewish orphans; a book of drawings by Moshe Barash entitled "Figures from the haze" (in Hebrew); and a book of songs entitled "Songs from the Vilna ghetto" (in Yiddish). A.E.F D.P. registration records consist of registration cards including medical clearances, supplemental records fact sheets, and unoccupied children information sheets about Jewish orphans after World War II. The records are arranged by name in alphabetical order from Bialek to Zycher. Administrative records document Fine’s work with displaced persons and include signed petitions, a 1983 letter from Fine describing her work, a voluntary transfer slip for Fine, a letter regarding Fine’s resignation, and a list of children’s names. Correspondence includes postwar letters from Leonard Montefiore to Fine as well as copies of two speeches he gave at the Cambridge University Jewish society in 1946 and at the Central British Fund Conference in 1947. Photographs depict Jewish orphans from 1945-1946 attending English lessons in the lounge, eating dinner, having their wounds dressed, playing sports, in the nursery, by the lake, washing clothes, cooking, and reading. Most of the photographs are identified as having been taken at Windermere, and most bear the copyright stamp of Pictorial Press. Printed materials include newspaper clippings and articles regarding Jewish Children’s day, Auschwitz refugees preparing for new home in Palestine, and German refugees. The series also includes a 1948 drawing book titled “Figures from the Haze” by Moshe Barash and pamphlets from the Central British Fund for Jewish Relief.