Trial against the staff of KL Auschwitz-Birkenau

Proces członków załogi Oświęcimia (Sygn. GK 196)

16,271 digital images, PDF

15 microfilm reels, 35 mm

Instytut Pamięci Narodowej-Komisja Ścigania Zbrodni przeciwko Narodowi Polskiemu

The Supreme National Tribunal (Najwyższy Trybunał Narodowy, NTN) was a war crimes tribunal active in Poland from 1946 to 1948. The Tribunal's aims and purpose were defined by the State National Council in the Decrees of 22 January and 17 October 1946 and 11 April 1947. The new law was based on the earlier Decree of 31 August 1944 (Sierpniówka) issued by the new Polish pro-Soviet government, with jurisdiction over Nazi criminals and traitors to the Polish nation. The tribunal presided over seven high-profile cases (Total of 49 individuals).

Contains investigation materials and court documents relating to the trial of Auschwitz and Birkenau concentration camp staff, also records on crimes in other concentration camps. Records contain court cases against many war criminals, such as Adolf Eichmann, Rudolf Hoess (Höss), Dr. Goebel, Karl Ernst Moeckel, Maximilian Grabner as well as against SS physicians accused of experimental operations on Polish women, against female SS camp guards, and other Auschwitz SS staff members. Includes documents on historical background on Nazi leadership; an illustrated SS guidebook for German personnel at Auschwitz on treatment of prisoners; explanation of SS ranks, personnel lists, organization charts; documents on sterilization and castration at Auschwitz camp hospital, death reports, lists of victims, death certificates, witness statements on medical experiments by German doctors in Auschwitz; detailed information on 2,188 Auschwitz prisoners; list of 5,271 inmates; list of victims organized by name and nationality; the United Nations War Crimes commission report: “Gestapo Executions in Concentration Camps,” 1945; testimonies on operations in Ravensbrűck, called “Experimental Rabbits”. Also contains a broad range of testimonies, and Polish songs and poetry from Auschwitz.