Jewish refugee children in Britain

John Berrys, formerly Hans Berlinsky, was born in Berlin, Germany on April 25, 1926. His family lived a normal life until the Nazi regime. Hans's father obtained a spot for him on the first Kindertransport out of Germany which arrived in Harwich, England on December 2 ,1938 (it is still uknown how he secured transit). He stayed in the Dovercourt Holiday Camp for a short duration of time until he was taken in by a foster family who lived just north of London. He participated in everyday activities and lived in England through his preteen years. When he graduated high school, he went to a hostel for boys in Birmingham and worked as a mechanic. He decided to join the British Army and after WWII ended, he was sent to Norway with his regiment to help with relief efforts. After that, he was sent to the Middle East, including Palestine and Egypt. He was in the Army for three years but quit after he found out his parents had survived the Holocaust and Theresienstadt Camp. Hans tried to get his parents to England, but was unsuccessful due to the Quarter System. The family decided to move to Montreal, Canada. He is still living in Toronto and actively tells his story to students in Germany and to organizations around North America.

Universal Newsreel, Vol. 10, No. 727, Part 2C. Release date, 12/12/1938. According to UN Official Motion Picture Release: "Young Refugees Reach Britain" Harwich, England. 206 German-Jewish youngsters, whose parents fill Nazi concentration camps, arrive on peaceful shores with their meager belongings to start life anew in comfortable quarters and in safe surroundings. Young Jewish refugees arrive in Britain, including Hans Berlinsky [now John Berrys] at 12:10:08. Girls walking down ramp from ship. Coats. Suitcases. Boys and girls walking along street with luggage. CU of smiling, happy boys. Pan of lots of boys and girls waving from cabin cottage doorways; CU 2 boys in window. MS seated at long dining hall. CU 2 girls eating, smiling. Other parts of newsreel include: 12:11:07 2D: "Pomp marks Ataturk funeral" 12:11:43 2E: "Czechs elect New President" 12:11:57 2F: "Huge Blimp has aerial debut" 12:12:22 2G: "Garner boomed for president" ends at 12:12:52