Fiala, Adler, and Fixler families collection

folders

oversize folder

3

1

Mark Fiala was born Meyer Fromowitz on July 16, 1915, in Berezovo, Czechoslovakia, to Yehoshua and Esther (née Adler) Fromowitz. He was one of many siblings, including sisters Chaya, Basya, Yenta, and brother Alex. Prior to World War II, he married a first cousin, Chaya Ruchel Adler (also known as Ruzena). The couple had two children, Ester (born August 20, 1940) and David (born April 13, 1942). Chaya, Ester, and David all perished in the Holocaust. After the war, Meyer changed his name to Mark Fiala, and married Lenka (later Lilli) Fixler on May 11, 1946. The couple emigrated to Israel in 1949 and had two children: Ava (b. 1947) and Jerry (b. 1954). They all emigrated to Cleveland, Ohio, in 1958.

Lenka Fiala was born Lilli Fixler on March 20, 1924 in Tačovo (now Ukraine), to Yehuda and Ester Fixler. Yehuda had children from a previous marriage: Iczik, Ira, Jankel, Shalom, Henrick, and Helen. Together, Yehuda and Ester had eleven children: Eliezer, Mordchaj, Simon, Leopold, Lilli, Blanka, Eva, Zelig, Majer, and Henje. Of the children, Iczik and his wife Fani, Jankel, Henrick, Helen and her husband Jeno and daughter Eva, Mordchaj, Zelig, Majer, and Henje were all murdered in the Holocaust. Leopold (Leo) Fixler escaped to England and joined the British Army. He later emigrated to Cleveland and brought the surviving members of his family over after the war. After the war, Lenka changed her name to Lilli and on May 11, 1946, married Mark Fiala. The couple emigrated to Israel in 1949 and had two children: Ava (b. 1947) and Jerry.

Consists of photographs and documents related to the Fromowitz (later Fiala) and Adler families of Berezovo, Czechslovakia (now Berezovo, Ukraine) and of the Fixler family of Tačovo. Includes family trees of the Adler and Fixler families, official translations of official paperwork collected after the war by Mark Fiala and Lilli Fixler documenting his name change, the deaths of his first wife (Chaya Adler) and their children; and their 1946 marriage. Also includes pre-war photographs and copyprints of members of the Adler and Fixler families, many of whom perished in the Holocaust.