Concentration camps: Collection of documents

Obozy koncentracyjne-Zbiór akt (Sygn.1333 )

3 microfilm reels, 35 mm

Archiwum Akt Nowych

The Central Archives of Modern Records was created through a decree issued by chief of state Józef Piłsudski on 7 February 1919. The archive quickly became one of the largest archives, which, in 1939 was a possession of 35 kilometers of records of central state institutions. Unfortunately, 97% of the records gathered were destroyed, burned during 2nd World War, under German occupation. Nowadays, the Central Archives of Modern Records in Warsaw works on the ground of the Act on National Archival Records and Archives of July 14, 1983, Journal of Law, (Dziennik Ustaw) No 38, 1983.07.19 with later changes. The Central Archives of Modern Records possesses 25 kilometers of records, collected in almost 2400 archival collections of records of central state institutions, social, political records and records from the period of Polish independence. These include records of such important central institutions as the Civil Chancellery of the President of the Republic of Poland, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other ministries from the tnterwar period. The most valuable records include documents of the Polish Underground State from the period of World War II - the Office of Government Delegate and Home and the Headquarters of the Polish Home Army (AK), documents of underground institutions and underground military which were active under German and Soviet occupation during World War II and which were the largest in Europe. Records of political parties are located at the Archive as well. It is also in possession of numerous records of social institutions, such as trade unions and associations. The heritage of the most significant personages in the history of Poland is of special significance at the Archive. The Archive of Ignacy Jan Paderewski, an outstanding musician and politician, and the records of Marshall Józef Piłsudski are particularly important. The Archive is also in possession of a huge collection of photographs, audio materials and a cartographic collection. It is also preparing to begin collecting electronic documentation.

Contains correspondence, lists of prisoners, and memoirs concerning different ghettos, concentration camps, and death camps in Poland.