Training for future Nazi leaders of occupied countries [captured German film]

Seized German film described by NARA as showing a training course for German future leaders of occupied countries. The original title is missing and the beginning of the film seems to be missing as well. German titles throughout. The first title states that during the lunch hour the students enjoy the beautiful Alpine landscape. Uniformed men wander around the grounds of a castle, which is the NS-Ordensburg Sonthofen, built by the DAF (German Workers Front) under Robert Ley in 1934. Nice views of the castle and Nazi officers at leisure. A title says that the three course instructors are talking over the work for the next day. The three men are shown, shot from below, having an animated discussion. The next shots shows them in close-up. The man on the left appears to be from the civil administration of the General Government (Poland) or the Ukraine. One of the officers greets three women in civilian clothes. A title says that elocution and study groups [Vortraege und Arbeitsgemeinschafte] occur in the afternoon. One of the young women speaks into a microphone. 01:22:40 A group of men, presumably the participants in the course, march on the grounds of the castle. Men sit in a large hall, listening to a senior government official [Oberregierungsrat] named Krieg, from the Propaganda Ministry. The next speaker is Kreisleiter Hoess, from Prague (not Rudolf Hoess). A group of the students, some of them shirtless, work in the castle's garden. They harvest carrots and eat some of them. A title announces that the students will be attending a film screening in Sonthofen. A long column of uniformed men marches down from the castle into the town. Back at the castle, the students spend their evening hours in the tea room. Views of the interior of the tea room. On Sunday the group goes to the nearby town of Nebelhorn. Panning shots of Nebelhorn followed by a view of a group of women travelling up the mountain in a cable car. Men in civilian clothes and in uniforms, and some women, in a crowded beer hall, where an orchestra performs. This is apparently the last night of the course and thus an evening of celebration. On the next day, one of the leaders speaks to the group. Nice shots of men and women saluting the swastika flag. 01:33:44 At the conclusion of the course the group travels to Munich to visit the Feldherrnhalle. Views of the memorial complex on the Odeonsplatz and CUs of some of the participants in the ceremony, including many men in civilian clothes and a few in Bavarian dress. 01:35:24 Men in uniforms and civilian clothes carry two large wreaths and place them on the steps of the memorial. The rest of the group walks up the steps and around the structure. Nice views of the streets around the memorial and the memorial itself. More views of the Ordensburg Sonthofen castle.