Flusser and Rosenbaum families papers

boxes

oversize boxes

book enclosures

oversize folders

2

4

2

2

Blanka Maria Rosenbaum (née Lipiner, 1896-1974) was born on 7 June 1896 in Vienna to Adolf and Luise Lipiner. Her father was Jewish and her mother was Protestant. She had four brothers. The oldest, Oscar Morgensterm (from a previous marriage) was in a forced labor camp during the Holocaust, and died of injuries after the war. Her other brothers all survived the Holocaust after fleeing Europe. Blanka married Rudolf Flusser (1903-1981) in 1926. She also worked for the Oesterreichische Creditanstalt until 1931 and Rudolf was a textile engineer. They had two children: Peter (b. 1930) and Susan Elfriede (later Susan Tausig, b. 1936). The family lived in Vienna until 1937 when they moved to Prague. In 1939 Blanka and Rudolf separated. Blanka and Peter went to China via Genoa in 1939. Rudolf and Susan remained in Prague until 1941 when they fled to China via the Trans-Siberian Railway to Vladivostok and Japan. They arrived in Shanghai in April 1941. The family was reunited and Blanka and Rudolf formally divorced. Blanka married Ludwig Rosenbaum in October 1942. Ludwig, Blanka, Peter, and Susan remained in Shanghai after the war while they were waiting for visas to immigrate to the United States. Peter immigrated to the United States to attend school. Ludwig, Blanka, and Susan left Shanghai in 1950 and stayed in the Wildflecken and Föhrenwald displaced persons camps. They immigrated to the United States in November 1951, sailing out of Bremerhaven, Germany on the USS C.H. General Muir. Susan later married Henry Tausig, whose father Paul Tausig, was also in Shanghai during the Holocaust. Rudolf married Dina Ravve (1913-1981), whose family fled Russia after the Russian Revolution and became wealthy merchants in Shanghai. Rudolf’s mother and two siblings were all deported to Theresienstadt where they perished. The only member of his family to survive was his sister’s daughter Ilona Flehner (née Taussik), who also fled to Shanghai.

Ludwig Rosenbaum (1888-1964) was born on 14 October 1888 in Vienna, Austria to Heinrich and Bertha (née Loewy) Rosenbaum. He worked as an accountant for the Oesterreichische Creditanstalt from 1910 to 1938. He was married to Margarete Rothbaum (1890-1941) and they had one son, Herbert Wolfgang (1918-1944). After the German annexation of Austria in March 1938, Ludwig began looking for ways to emigrate. He and his wife and son left Vienna in October 1938 and went to Shanghai via Trieste, Italy aboard the SS Conte Rosso. Margarete died in 1941 and Ludwig married Blanka Flusser in October 1942. His son Herbert died of meningitis in 1944. Ludwig, Blanka, Peter, and Susan remained in Shanghai after the war while they were waiting for visas to immigrate to the United States. Peter immigrated to the United States to attend school. Ludwig, Blanka, and Susan left Shanghai in 1950 and stayed in the Wildflecken and Föhrenwald displaced persons camps. They immigrated to the United States in November 1951, sailing out of Bremerhaven, Germany on the USS C.H. General Muir. Susan later married Henry Tausig, whose father Paul Tausig, was also in Shanghai during the Holocaust.

The collection documents the Holocaust-era experiences in Shanghai of the Flusser and Rosenbaum families, both originally of Vienna, Austria, including Blanka and Rudolf Flusser, their children Peter and Susan (later Susan Flusser Tausig), and Ludwig Rosenbaum. Included are biographical materials, immigration paperwork, restitution papers, correspondence, printed material, and photographs documenting their emigration from Vienna to Shanghai, Blanka and Rudolf’s divorce and her marriage to Ludwig in 1942, their emigration from Shanghai in 1950 to Germany, their time in the Wildflecken and Föhrenwald displaced persons camps, and immigration to the United States in 1951. Biographical materials primarily consist of post-war copies of documentation including birth certificates, Blanka Rosenbaum’s baptism certificate, marriage and divorce papers, and materials about Ludwig Rosenbaum’s employment with Oesterreichische Creditanstalt in Austria and employment in Shanghai. Other material includes Susan Flusser’s autograph book from 1945, a scrapbook chronicling her travels in Europe and the United States, 1951-1954, Organization for Rehabilitation through Training (ORT) documents from the Föhrenwald DP camp, and an identification card; Rudolf Flusser’s Czech passport; Ludwig’s identification card from Shanghai and a document regarding his son Herbert’s death in 1944; personal papers of Paul Tausig, the father of Susan’s future husband Henry Tausig, who was also in Shanghai during the Holocaust; and the death certificate for Ludwig’s first wife Maragarete Rosenbaum, who died in Shanghai in 1941. Immigration papers document the Flusser's and Rosenbaum’s emigration from Austria to Shanghai and their immigration to the United States after the Holocaust. Documents related to Shanghai include Ludwig and his family’s tickets for passage on the SS Conte Rosso from Trieste to Shanghai in 1938, a Shanghai census form, and an authorization form to assist the police in the Honkew district. Documents related to immigration to the United States include wartime paperwork regarding attempts to obtain visas, postwar correspondence and with American Consulate in Shanghai, a newsletter from the SS Anna Salen, Declaration of Intention forms, and Ludwig’s naturalization certificate from 1957. Restitution paperwork consists of documents and correspondence regarding restitution with Austria. Includes paperwork from the United Restitution Organization (URO). Correspondence includes letters from Erwin Feld, an attorney in Shanghai; letters from Ludwig to the Kohn’s written from the SS Anna Salen en route to Bremerhaven from Shanghai in 1950; and letters to Ludwig from Marianne Weiss and Georg Tengler. Printed material, writings and miscellaneous include newspaper clippings from the North-China Daily News and Shanghai Times; a map of Shanghai; poems and writings; a flyer for Reverend Werner Wedel, who was a minister in Shanghai; a music score and concert flyers, some of which feature Ludwig as a performer; and a handmade farewell card for Alexander Fried, who was the manager of the Café Roy, a restaurant in Shanghai popular with refugees. Photographs include pre-war, wartime, and post-war depictions of the Flusser and Rosenbaum families in Vienna, Shanghai, and the Wildflecken and Föhrenwald displaced persons camps. Includes family photographs of Blanka and her family, the Flusser family apartment in Vienna, Ludwig, Susan, and Susan’s future father-in-law Paul Tausig. Photograph albums consist of a pre-war album of Ludwig Rosenbaum with his first wife Margarete and their son Herbert; an annotated post-war album documenting the Flusser and Rosenbaum families in Shanghai circa 1947-1949; an annotated post-war album documenting the Wildflecken DP camp and a trip to Salzburg around 1950, primarily contains postcards; a wartime and post-war primarily consisting of photographs of the Flusser and Rosenbaum family in Shanghai and the United States; and an album documenting the Rosenbaums in the Föhrenwald DP camp, 1951.