Legacies and papers of Dr. Mikołaj Łącki

Spuścizna Dr. Mikołaja Łąckiego (Sygn.1293)

2,025 digital images, PDF

Archiwum Państwowe w Warszawie

Łącki Mikołaj (1888-1969), physician, epidemiologist, hygienist, organizer of health care, assistant professor at the Institute of Mother and Child in Warsaw, social worker and educator. Working in the management of the city of Warsaw, he sought to develop health centers, establish cooperation with social institutions and the Social Insurance Institution. He developed a preventive vaccination campaign against tuberculosis and diphtheria, resulting in a decrease in morbidity and mortality. After the outbreak of the war, Ł. Was appointed head of the health service of the capital city of Warsaw, he served until December 1944 as deputy director of the Department of Care and Health. He was mainly involved in the fight against tuberculosis and typhoid, and expanded the care of babies and children. He announced about 40 works in Polish, French and German, including several with his wife. They concerned mainly epidemiology and prophylaxis of tuberculosis, diphtheria, diarrhea, typhoid, protective vaccination, organization of care over infants and children, statistical analysis of health condition, physical development and child mortality, statistical analysis of miscarriage including methods of their eradication, hospital construction and in. He developed an extensive chapter on the child's hygiene in the "Higiena General" publishing house (1961). In his works he used modern statistical methods. He was honored, among others, with the Cross of Valor in 1939, the Knight's Cross of the Rebirth of Poland, and the Gold Honorary Medal of the Capital City of Warsaw, "For exemplary work in the health service."

Papers of Dr. Mikołaj Łącki. The collection consists of prints, manuscripts, typescripts (own and foreign works, various papers, statistics-mostly in the form of tables), notes, calculations, letters. Materials concern the extensive activity of dr. Łącki and living conditions of the people in the Warsaw ghetto.