Italian poster for the film “Daleká cesta” (1949)

Overall: Height: 27.500 inches (69.85 cm) | Width: 13.000 inches (33.02 cm)

The poster was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 2018 by Ken Sutak and Sherri Venokur.

The Cinema Judaica Collection consists of more than 1,200 objects relating to films about World War II and the Holocaust as well as Jewish, Israeli, and biblical subjects, from 1923 to 2000, from the United States, Europe, Israel, Canada, Mexico, and Argentina. The collection was amassed by film memorabilia collector Ken Sutak, to document Holocaust-and Jewish-themed movies of the World War II era and the postwar years. The collection includes posters, lobby and photo cards, scene stills, pressbooks, trade ads, programs, magazines, books, VHS tapes, DVDS, and 78 rpm records. Sutak organized these materials into two groups, “Cinema Judaica: The War Years, 1939–1949” and “Cinema Judaica: The Epic Cycle, 1950–1972” and, in conjunction with the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion Museum (now the Dr. Bernard Heller Museum in New York), organized exhibitions on these two themes in 2007 and 2008. Sutak subsequently authored companion books with the same titles.

Italian Locandina poster for the Czechoslovakian film, “Daleká cesta” (“Distant Journey”), released in Italy as “Alles Kaputt” (“All is Broken") in 1961. Locandina posters were similar to American insert posters, which were a popular size of film posters, often framed and used in special, small displays within a theater lobby. “Daleká cesta” follows a Jewish doctor in Prague who marries a Christian colleague, but is forced to quit her hospital job after the Germans invade the region. Her parents are forced to relocate to Theresienstadt ghetto-labor camp in German-occupied Czechoslovakia. Eventually, she and her husband are sent to separate camps, and she begins working as a camp doctor in Theresienstadt. The film incorporates German propaganda and documentary newsreel footage that marks the passage of time throughout the narrative. The film received approval from the Film Censorship Bureau and premiered in communist Czechoslovakia in March 1949, but the Minister of Information severely restricted publicity and distribution for it, due largely to the director’s style of aggressive expressionism. Alfred Radok, the director, was half-Jewish, and escaped from a detention camp near the end of the war, and his father and grandfather both died in Theresienstadt. This object is one of more than 1,200 objects in the Cinema Judaica Collection of materials related to films about World War II and the Holocaust as well as Jewish, Israeli, and biblical themes.