Jack and Beatrice Glotzer papers

folders

9

Jack Glotzer (1925-2005) was born Jacob (Kuba) Glotzer in Rohatyn Poland (now Ukraine) to butcher Mayer Glotzer and Toba Barban Glotzer. He had two younger brothers, Samuel (Miko) and Moshe Emanuel (Edmund). Mayer Glotzer immigrated to the United States in 1937. The Glotzers' home lay within the borders of the Rohatyn ghetto, established in late 1941. Toba and Edmund Glotzer perished when the ghetto was liquidated in June 1943. Jack and Samuel hid in the woods where Samuel perished shortly before liberation in 1944. Jack served in the Red Army until 1946, spent one year in the Schlachtensee displaced persons camp and two years in Bayreuth, and immigrated to Brooklyn in 1949. In 1951 he married Beatrice Walzer, born Bronia Walzer in Jarosław, Poland. She had survived the war in hiding in Modolycze, and lived at the Jäger Kaserne displaced persons camp until immigrating to the United States in 1949.

The Jack and Beatrice Glotzer papers consist of biographical materials, a memoir, photographs, and a postcard documenting Jack Glotzer’s family in pre‐war and wartime Rohatyn and Jack and Beatrice Glotzer’s immigration to the United States in 1949. Biographical materials include the meal card Beatrice Glotzer used during her passage to the United States, an International Refugee Organization medical tag issued to her when the ship reached Boston Harbor, and two report cards issued to Edmund Glotzer in 1938 and 1939. Jack Glotzer’s memoir, I Survived the German Holocaust Against All Odds: A Unique and Unforgettable Story of a Struggle for Life, describes his childhood in Rohatyn, Russian occupation, German occupation, Gestapo Actions, survival hiding in the woods, liberation by the Red Army, military service in the Red Army, return to Rohatyn, postwar life in Schlachtensee and Bayreuth, and immigration to the United States. Photographs depict Jack Glotzer’s family in Poland, Edmond Glotzer with his classmates, Jack Glotzer’s aunt Malke Altman and her family in Poland, his uncle Wilhelm Rapaport during World War I, and Beatrice Glotzer aboard the ship that brought her to the United States. The postcard was written by Toni Glotzer in Rohatyn before the ghetto to her husband in New York and mentions his inability to help her and their sons.