Housing and Settlement Office

353-3 Wohnwirtschafts- und Siedlungsamt

10 digital images, JPEG

Staatsarchiv Hamburg (Germany)

In 1937, the Baubehörde das Wohnwirtschafts- und Siedlungsamt (Housing and Settlement Office), WWSA was established as a separate department within the building authority. As of January 1938, it was responsible for the small housing and folk housing matters as well as the renovation of the building. With effect from 01.04.1938 the WWSA became an independent part of the municipal administration. In 1940, the Gauleiter were appointed Gauwohnungskommissaren. The managing director of the Gauwohnungskommissar was in Hamburg the head of the Gauheimstättenwerk, which was connected in personal union with the WWSA. This office was entrusted with tasks of the state administration as the office of the Gauwohnungskommissar. In the promotion of measures to steer and control housing construction, the WWSA was objectively subordinate to the Hamburg state administration. In 1943, the WWSA was incorporated as part of the reorganization of the construction management together with the Amt für kriegswichtigen Einsatz (Office for mission critical), AKE as Amt 5 in the construction management. The most urgent task was now the construction of makeshift shelters (quick-flats, factory housing). In 1947, the WWSA was combined with the Housing Office to the Housing Office, a precursor of the Office of Housing. In 1943, the WWSA was incorporated as part of the reorganization of the construction management together with the Office for mission critical (AKE) as Amt 5 in the construction management. The most urgent task was now the construction of makeshift shelters (quick-flats, factory housing). In 1947, the WWSA was combined with the Housing Office to the Housing Office, a precursor of the Office of Housing. In 1943, the WWSA was incorporated as part of the reorganization of the construction management together with the Office for mission critical (AKE) as Amt 5 in the construction management. The most urgent task was now the construction of makeshift shelters (quick-flats, factory housing). In 1947, the WWSA was combined with the Housing Office to the Housing Office, a precursor of the Office of Housing.

Selected records relating to residential housing estates and construction projects for individual settlers in Hamburg, 1940. The entire collection contains general files on organizational and personnel matters, and on the overall planning and on individual projects. The largest part of the records are the settlement files to small, outskirts, group, unemployed, SA, state, factory and residential housing estates and construction projects of individual settlers in Hamburg (before and after the Greater Hamburg Act) and for places outside of Hamburg: Ahrensburg, Buchholz/Kreis Harburg, Bünningstedt, Egenbüttel, Friedrichsgabe, Garstedt, Glinde, Harksheide, Henstedt, Hoisbüttel, Husum, Malchow/Mecklenburg, Pinneberg, Quickborn, Schenefeld, Steinbek / Kreis Harburg, Süder- and Westerwisch, 1931-1965.