Colection of Rabbi Aaron Barend N. Davids (Aaron Barend)

Collectie Rabbijn Aaron Barend N. Davids (P-122)

1,565 digital images, JPEG

Arkhiyon ha-merkazi le-toldot ha-ʻam ha-Yehudi

Rabbi A.B.N. Davids (Aaron Barend) was born in August 28, 1895 in Amsterdam and died Feb. 22 2, 1945 in Bergen-Belsen. Davids studied at a Jewish primary school in Amsterdam and at the rabbinical seminary there. In 1921 he received a degree in classical studies from the University of Amsterdam, and in 1923 was ordained as a rabbi. He studied at the rabbinical seminary in Berlin as well. During the time of his studies he co-founded and headed the Jewish Religious School in South Amsterdam. On 29 June, 1924, Davids was appointed Chief Rabbi of Friesland (a province of the Netherlands), and in 1927 became Chief Rabbi of Groningen, where he succeeded Chief Rabbi A. Ascher. After two years, he succeeded Rabbi B.L Ritter as Chief Rabbi of Rotterdam and the surrounding municipalities. Under his direction the magazine Onze gemeenschap. Rotterdamsch orgaan van Joodsche saamhorigheid was published. He also wrote articles for Mizrachie. The bombing of Rotterdam on 14 May 1940 caused chaos in the Jewish community from which it was unable to recover. During this time, Davids insisted on maintaining faith and tradition in order to reestablish the Jewish community in the future. He continued his work even when the occupying forces steadily pursued the persecution of the Jews and deployed his full energy for his Jewish fellow citizens, supporting those who would be deported, and turned down an offer to prevent his deportation as he wanted to stay with his people. Davids and his family were transferred to Westerbork on 7 June 1943 and from there to Bergen-Belsen on 11 January 1944. While in the camps he tried to continue his work as a religious leader until he died in Bergen-Belsen on 22 February 1945. (Source: Institute for Dutch History: http://www.inghist.nl/Onderzoek/Projecten/BWN/lemmata/bwn3/davids)

Private documents, correspondence, announcements, articles, sermons, speeches, and lectures of Rabbi A.B.N. Davids (Aaron Barend). Included also are notices, separate numbers of some Jewish periodicals, as well as newspaper clippings and some brochures with scientific dissertations about Dr. D. Feuchtwang, a chief rabbi of Vienna, 1897-1957, a publication the "In Memoriam for the chief Rabbi A. Ascher Ezn", as well as a bereavement of A.B.N. Davids, a commemorative book on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the Groningen synagogue, 1931, documents received from the University Library in Amsterdam concerning "Bibliotheca Rosenthalia," 1937, 1940, and various publications, letters (undated).