World Union of Jewish Students, Vienna

Weltverband der jüdischen Studentenschaft, Wien (Fond 1230)

3 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

3,798 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The World Union of Jewish Students (WUJS) was funded in May 1924 in Antwerp. It comprised Jewish student organizations of Great Britain, Germany, Austria, Belgium, Hungary, Romania, and other countries. The World Union of Jewish Students was created primarily to consolidate the efforts of Jewish student organizations of various countries toward solving social problems among Jewish students, combating antisemitism, and preserving and studying Jewish religious traditions and the Jewish historical and cultural heritage.

This collection contains office records of this international student organization. Included are protocols of general meetings and executive board meetings, correspondence, policy statements, proposals, and position papers to be presented at international conferences, press clippings, copies of an English-language publication “The Monthly News Sheet”; and a number of English-language records from the International Student Service. The collection contains correspondence with the Jewish Unions from other countries on holding conferences, uniting Jewish student’s organization into one single union, providing aid to Jewish students on fundraising, setting hostels, developing tourism, on Jewish student emigration from Germany and Poland, Jewish quota at Hungarian universities, and Jewish student trips from Bratislava to Palestine. It also includes correspondence with Albert Einstein, Julian Mack, Stephen Wise on providing aid to the World Union of Jewish Students; correspondence with Jewish and other public organizations: the World Jewish Congress, American Jewish Congress, the League of Nations International Institute of Intellectual Cooperation, the World Student Christian Federation, and the International University Federation for the League of Nations, the International Student Relief Organization, and others. Printed materials include bulletins of the International Student Relief Organization (1920, 1930, 1933), the Union of Jewish Students in Germany (1927), the Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JAT); and the pamphlet “The International Student Relief Organization: A Brief Survey of its History, Goals, and Plans for the Future.” Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records. Those records are replacing a previous acquisition of one folder only: RG-11.001M.41.