Celebrating the opening of the new Reichstag; parades in Potsdam

Celebrating the opening of the new Reichstag in Potsdam's Garrison Church on March 21, 1933 (film begins on Film ID 2775). Shows overpowering National Socialist propaganda. Goebbels staged this day as a device to win support from conservatives and to reassure Germans that the new Reich's Chancellor Hitler could be trusted. German intertitles (in quotation marks). "Der Tag von Potsdam 1933 II. Teil" "Reichskanzler Adolf Hitler und Vizekauzler von Papen" "Gott mitt uns" banner hanging across the street. Officials marching, including Hitler and von Papen. Hitler salutes at 01:00:35. More officials, men and women. 01:01:25 Side view of officials parading in the street towards the cathedral. 01:01:59 CU Hitler. "Auffahrt des Reichspraesidenten" Procession of automobiles. Rifle squad. HS, streets lined with soldiers. Shot of church. "Reichspraesident von Hindenburg schreitet die Front der Ehrenkompagne ab" von Hindenburg marches towards the camera. German press run past him to get a photograph. More shots of Hindenburg. "Hindenburg wird vor der Garrisonkirche von Hitler und Goering begruesst" View from behind soldiers of crowd saluting as Hindenburg shakes hands with Goering. Men crowded around church entrance. "Veteranen aus dem kriege 1870/71 erwarten nach dem Staatsakt ein Reichspraesidenten um von ihm begrusst zu warden" The old guard sits in front row, some in wheelchairs. LS, elderly man with hat holding swastika pennant. VAR shots of crowds gathered in Potsdam. "Hindenburg verlasst nach der Kranzniedorlegung die Gruft Friedrich des grossen" Soldiers salute Hindenburg, seeen from behind, walking to podium to review parade. "Die Parade beginnt" VAR shots, soldiers parading, marching band, goosestepping, climbing in trees for better view. Cavalry troops, weapons. "Die Reichsregierung auf der Tribuene" View of Nazi officials sitting at demonstration passes. "Vorbeimarsch der SA" Stormtroopers march past, various views of spectators saluting. "Der Stahlhelm marschiert" Steel helmets parade, flags. "Die Fahnen des Kyffhaeuser bundes" CUs, important men, VAR shots. "Die nationale Jugend Deutschlands" Hitler Youth marches, salute. CU, flag "Deutschland Erwache" and swastika. Pan up to "NSDAP" "Ende"