Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet papers

Nachlass Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet (1916-2010)

6,822 digital images, PDF

Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich. Archiv für Zeitgeschichte - Archivleitung

Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet (1916-2010) was a Swiss helper and human rights activist. Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet grew up in the Vallée de Joux , in 1940 she graduated with a degree in history from the University of Lausanne . In the years 1942-1944 she worked for the child support of the Swiss Red Cross at the Château de Bellevue in Montluel and the Château de la Hille near Toulouse. When the National Socialists occupied southern France, Im Hof-Piguet saved twelve Jewish children and adults by helping them illegally cross the border into Switzerland. The escape route ran from La Hille to Chappelle-des-Bois via Toulouse, Lyon, children's colony Montluel, Champagnole. From Chapelle-des-Bois they crossed the rocky path Gy de l'Echelle at the Mont Risoux to the meeting point on the Swiss side in the hut " Hôtel d'Italie" . The Jewish refugees were picked up by Im Hof-Piguet's father, the forest inspector Henri-Joseph Piguet. Her mother accompanied the refugees to Zurich as a refugee pastor. After the Second World War, Anne-Marie Im Hof- Piguet worked as a teacher in the cantons of Vaud and Basel-Stadt. In 1947 she married the historian Ulrich Im Hof, established a family and worked as a teacher in Berne. In 1959, she was co-founder of Swiss contact Foundation for Development Cooperation in Zurich (Stiftung für Entwicklungszusammenarbeit in Zürich). In 1985 she published her memoirs, where she described her experiences as a Red Cross helper. With the prize money of the Doron Prize of 1998, she launched the Academy of Human Rights as an educational and meeting center. Honors: In 1990 she was honored as a righteous among the peoples; in 1992 she received the Doron Foundation Prize; in 1998, she received the Human Rights Prize of the Swiss Section of the International Society for Human Rights. Publications: Im Hof-Piguet, Anne-Marie: La Filière. En France occupée 1942-1944, Yverdon-les-Bains, s.d. [1986] Im Hof-Piguet, Anne-Marie: Fluchtweg durch die Hintertür. Eine Rotkreuzhelferin im besetzten Frankreich 1942-1944, Frauenfeld 1987 Im Hof-Piguet, Anne-Marie: Fluchtweg, in: Fischer, Monica: "Retten Sie wenigstens mein Kind", Zeitzeugen des Zweiten Weltkrieges berichten, Zürich 2000, S. 37-43.

Private papers of Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet (1916-2010), a Swiss helper and human rights activist. The collection consists of biographical materials, school photos, documents concerning honors, film and radio broadcast about Anne-Marie Im Hof-Piguet, reports from the Swiss Red Cross, applications concerning the child support of the Swiss Red Cross, handwritten and typed manuscripts "La Filière" und "Fluchtweg durch die Hintertür"', newspaper articles, photographs, audiovisual documentation from everyday life at the Château de La Hille, correspondence at the time of the Second World War, correspondence in connection with the book publications.