Allied Control Commission meets; Artworks return to Louvre; War damage in the Ruhr

The Welt im Film [World in Film] newsreel series was produced by the American and British military governments to support the denazification campaign in Germany and Austria. Screening was compulsory in cinemas in the American and British zones of Germany until the late 1940s.

Welt im Film. Issue no. 21 (part) Title: Allierte Kontrolkommission [Allied Control Commission]. Marshal Zhukov stands outside the Berlin building where the first conference of the Allied Control Commission will take place. Eisenhower arrives at the conference, then the French representative, and the British representative, General Montgomery. The narrator notes that the building where the conference will take place was once the home of the Nazi People's Court (Volksgerichthof). Shot of Allied flags. The four men pose in front of the building as the narrator says that the Control Commission is an example of how the Allies are working together. 01:28:59 Title: Kunstschaetze Kommen zum Louvre Zueruck [Art treasures return to the Louvre]. LS of the Chateau de Chambord, where treasures from the Louvre were stored during the war. Shots of crates inside the chateau and crates being removed. Exterior shot of the Louvre, then interiors showing the empty vitrines and walls. Men replace paintings on the walls. CU of a Renoir, Rubens, and the Mona Lisa. CUs of sculptures, including the Venus de Milo. 01:30:49 Title: Kriegsschaeden [War damage]. Shots of destruction in Dortmund. The narrator says that 90 percent of that city was destroyed or damaged and that the Allies are attempting to prevent people from returning to the Ruhr, which is the area that sustained the most damage. Women wash clothes with water from a fire hydrant. A woman washes clothes and hangs them on a line. Nurses work with medicines in a children's home. The narrator says that despite their efforts some 30 percent of newborns in Dortmund die. A nurse and a doctor tend to sick children.