Ana Jinno memoir

"Stories of Survival"

folder

1

Ana Jinno (1936-2020, previously Anna Kalina) was born Anna Klein on 1 December 1936 in Košice, Czechoslovakia (Košice, Slovakia). Ana’s father, Ferdinand Klein (nicknamed Nandor, later Francisco Kalina), was born on 11 April 1908 in Levoča, Slovakia to Armin and Anna (née Greenbaum) Klein. He had one brother, Eugen (Jano), and two sisters, Regina (Resh) and Frederika (Fritza). His family owned a coffee shop in Levoča. Ana’s mother, Margit Klein, was born in 1911 in Košice to Abraham Zvi Klein and Regina Klein. Margit had at least one sister and three brothers. Ferdinand and Margit married in 1935 in Košice, but later moved to Liptovský Mikuláš, Slovakia. On 31 March 1942 Ferdinand was arrested and deported to Žilina concentration camp. He was released after 11 days. Ferdinand and Margit arranged to have Margit’s parents and sister smuggled out of the Košice ghetto and brought to Liptovský Mikuláš in 1944. The family went into hiding and Ferdinand joined a local partisan group. The family was in Nitra, Slovakia when they were liberated by the Soviet Red Army. Margit gave birth to their second daughter, Katerina on 29 April 1945. Ferdinand’s sister Frederika, his brother Eugen, his wife Erzhi Schloss were all murdered at Poprad airport. His sister Regina and her family lived in Oravia, and were deported and murdered. After the war, the family returned to Košice. In May 1948 Ana and her family immigrated to La Paz, Bolivia. They moved to Montevideo, Uruguay in 1953. She married Victor Jinno in 1964 and they had three children. Ana, Victor, and their children moved to Israel in 1970 and settled in Petah Tikva.

Personal narrative authored by Ana Jinno (née Anna Klein, previously Anna Kalina), originally of Košice (Slovakia), and titled “Stories of Survival.” The narrative describes persecution in Slovakia, her father Ferdiand Klein’s deportation to Žilina concentration camp, his release from the camp, the family going into hiding, Ferdinand’s experiences with partisans, and post-war immigration to La Paz, Bolivia, Montevideo, Uruguay, and Petah Tikva, Israel.