Commemorative ribbon worn by a director of the Deggendorf DP camp

overall: Height: 6.625 inches (16.827 cm) | Width: 1.500 inches (3.81 cm)

The ribbon was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 2007 by Richard Katz, stepson of Carl Atkin.

Carl Atkin (1903-1976) was born in Brooklyn, New York, to Russian immigrants and had an older brother, Jacob (b. 1898- ?). He attended New York City public schools, graduating in 1922. Shortly thereafter, he married Frances Ruthenberg (1904-1969) and had two children. In his early career, Carl worked as a house painter, a newspaper reporter for the Standard News Association, and a publicity manager for the Coney Island Publicity Bureau. Following the attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the United States declared war on Japan and by December 11, Nazi Germany declared war on the United States. When Carl registered for selective service in February 1942 he was working for the Office of Emergency Management in Washington, D.C. He was not chosen to join the fighting, and instead worked as a property and supply officer for the U.S. Treasury Department’s San Francisco and Los Angeles offices. In the spring of 1945, Carl applied for a post with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA), an international humanitarian organization established to help countries left economically devastated and the people displaced during World War II. The organization was established in November 1943, and began administering displaced persons (DP) camps in the Middle East in May 1944. After the war ended in May 1945, the UNRRA assumed management of the DP assembly centers and camps in the French, British, and U.S. Zones in Germany and helped to repatriate millions of people. Carl joined the UNRRA and reported for training in Washington, D.C. on April 12, 1945. Leaving his family behind, Carl arrived in England on June 1 and continued on to a U.N. staging area in Heidelberg, Germany. On August 23, he led UNRRA Team 55 to Deggendorf, a former concentration camp turned displaced persons camp, in the American-occupied zone of Germany. When Carl’s team took over Deggendorf was largely populated by former inmates of Theresienstadt ghetto-labor camp and was poorly managed with overcrowding, poor living conditions and sanitation, as well as a lack of food and clothing. As camp director, Carl’s top priorities became stabilizing the food supply and securing housing facilities. He addressed the issue of overcrowding by reducing the number of refugees allowed in the camp. He also fostered the democratic election of a committee and self-administration within the camp. He improved physical infrastructure by providing new technical equipment such as central heating and water heaters, created a new large bathhouse, repaired sanitary systems, and generally enhanced dwelling conditions. Under his direction the camp opened a canteen to purchase items, introduced a currency with which to buy said products, and set up a banking system. Carl and his team also fostered cultural life with lectures, concerts, performances, and the creation of a community newspaper, in which he wrote a weekly column titled “Community Spirit.” Praised for his leadership, improvement of living conditions, and boosting of morale at Deggendorf, he left his directorship in December 1945 for an appointment as the UNRRA’s Coordinator of Jewish Affairs. Prior to his departure from Deggendorf, the Jewish Community gifted him a memory book reflecting on the progress made during his brief tenure and praising him for his advocacy and efforts on the community’s behalf. They threw him a farewell party in combination with a wedding celebration, where he served as best man. In his new role Carl traveled to numerous DP camps consulting on many of the improvements he had encouraged at Deggendorf including, the introduction of self-governments, monetary systems, and educational facilities. In March 1946, he returned to the U.S. and joined his family in Los Angeles and continued to work for UNRRA. By then, most liberated countries had functioning governments once again, and on July 2, 1947 the UNRRA ended operations. Carl transitioned into sales and advertising, as well as financial management for a nightclub that he co-owned. In 1951, he returned to his Jewish assistance efforts, joining the American Financial and Development Corporation for Israel, which had been established in 1950 and was headquartered in Los Angeles, to help raise funds for the devastated Israeli economy following the country’s War of Independence (1947-1949). In May 1951, Israel’s first Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion, visited LA for the inauguration of the State of Israel Bond Issue. In 1952, Carl transitioned into aerospace production management and documentation. In 1969, Carl’s wife, Frances died. In 1972, he married Edith J. Katz (nee Forman, 1912-1999) and became stepfather to her son, Richard (b. around 1936).

David Ben-Gurion (1886 – 1973) was the son of Zionist parents and moved from Poland to Palestine in 1906 to work in Jewish agricultural settlements. In 1917, he enlisted in the British Army’s Jewish Legion, and in 1920 he founded a confederation of Jewish workers in Palestine that would become the foundation for establishing a new Jewish state. In 1935, he was elected chairman of the World Zionist Organization and the Jewish Agency of Israel, which became an external arm for the Zionist movement to return to the Jewish homeland in Palestine. Following the end of World War II in 1945, many Jewish displaced persons wanted to establish an independent Jewish state in Palestine. However, the Arab population of Palestine objected and the British, who were administering Palestine, limited Jewish immigration. Many Jewish refugees immigrated to Palestine illegally, leading the British to detain them in camps and creating a public outcry. On November 29, 1947, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 181 to partition Palestine into Jewish and Arab states, and on May 14, 1948, Ben-Gurion declared Israel’s independence. This resolution sparked conflict between Jewish and Arab groups in Palestine, leading to the outbreak of Israel’s War of Independence. Ben-Gurion became the first Prime Minister and Defense Minister for the State of Israel, overseeing the new country’s development. Following the War of Independence, the Israeli economy was devastated and Ben-Gurion turned to American Jewish leaders to help him raise funds by issuing bonds. He traveled to New York City in 1951 to launch the sale of these bonds and proceeded to tour other cities in the U.S. Ben-Gurion retired from political life to Sde Boker in southern Israel’s Negev Desert in June 1970.

Commemorative ribbon worn by Carl Atkin for a reception dinner for Israeli Prime Minister, David Ben-Gurion held in Los Angeles, California, in 1951. Following Israel’s War of Independence (1947-1949), Ben-Gurion turned to American Jewish leaders to help him raise funds by issuing bonds. After the launch of these bonds, he traveled to Los Angeles, California, in 1951, where he was hosted by the Los Angeles Committee for the State of Israel Bonds and the American Financial and Development Corporation for Israel, where Carl Atkin worked. Prior to the end of World War II in 1945, Carl accepted a post with the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA), an international humanitarian organization. On August 23, 1945, he led UNRRA Team 55 to the poorly run Deggendorf displaced persons camp in the American-occupied zone of Germany, where they took over management. Carl and his team stabilized the food supply, secured housing facilities, fostered cultural life with lectures, concerts, performances, and established a community newspaper. Praised for his leadership, improvement of living conditions, and boosting of morale at Deggendorf, he left his directorship in December 1945 to accept an appointment as UNRRA’s Coordinator of Jewish Affairs. In March 1946, he returned to the US, rejoined his family in Los Angeles, and continued to work for the organization. On July 2, 1947, UNRRA terminated its activities and Carl transitioned into sales and advertising, financial management for a nightclub that he co-owned, and eventually aerospace production, management and documentation.