Day of German Art: exhibition and parade

Deulig Film or Deutsche Lichtbild-Gesellschaft was a German film production and distribution company. It was established in 1916 by the German business tycoon and media mogul Alfred Hugenberg. The company's foundation, during the First World War, was intended to promote Germany's military cause but it also supported the commercial interests of several major industrial companies who backed the enterprise. The company developed a reputation for the production of short propaganda films and kulturfilms but also released feature films. In response to the company's success several rival industrial firms in alliance with the Deutsche Bank founded their own film company UFA in 1917, which in the decade that followed became Germany largest film enterprise. In 1927 when Hugenberg launched a successful takeover bid for UFA, the two companies merged. Deulig continued to release newsreels but was otherwise swallowed into the larger UFA conglomerate.

05:54:50 Day of German Art. HAS of Munich. Cables. Banners everywhere. Boys' chorus recital in Feldherrnhall. Steady camera shots thru city, past various statues. Flowers decorate town, festival atmosphere. Hitler and entourage arrive at art exhibit. Road is lined with SS soldiers in long coats. Hitler opens art exhibition, speaking to a well-dressed crowd: "Rarely in German history is one so richly moved in peacetime...everyone working...so singularly great." ["selten in der deutschen Geschichte eine so reich bewegte Friedenszeit...Kulturprogramm von einmaliger Groesse."] CUs of Nazi elite in audience, Wagner, Goebbels, Frau Magda Goebbels, Bernhard Rust. LSs, buildings, plazas, train, autobahn. Hitler is very calm, expressive. Shots of artwork: a perfect Aryan family, simple working folk, ideal. Hitler, Goebbels, and entourage tour the exhibition, intercut with more artwork and statues. 05:59:13 Procession on the same day of German Art in Odeonplatz. Parade with symbolic figures of Viking/Medieval times with eagles, models, etc. (similar to footage in The Longest Hatred by BBC/Bloomstein). Mostly LS, goosestepping, floats, SA, SS, and Wehrmacht. Hitler and other Nazi elite watching from grandstand.