Red Cross Tracing Service in action; Berlin receives aid; UN meeting in New York

Welt im Film. Issue no. 78 Title: Suchdienst fuer Kinder und Eltern [Tracing service for children and parents]. Women in nurse uniforms and civilian clothing work in a busy office. Two nurses look through boxes of alphabetized cards. The narrator explains that the Red Cross is attempting to reunite parents and children torn apart by the war. Several people work at a large table, looking through boxes of cards. The main bureaus of the tracing service are in Munich and Hamburg. The next scenes show orphaned children living in a children's home that was formerly an SS Lebensborn center. Various cute shots of children being seen by a doctor, eating, and playing. Shots of children who have been adopted (fostered?) by a farm family. The narrator says that approximately 100 children find their parents every week through the work of the Red Cross. The last scene shows a young boy greeted by a happy woman, presumably his mother. 02:32:52 Title: Berlin: Vor dem Winter [Berlin: Before the winter]. Berliners prepare for winter by stocking food, much of it aid from abroad. Arrival of Canadian grain in large sacks, sides of frozen beef, and cabbage from Holland. People gather coal for heating and the Red Cross provides sacks of dried milk and other necessities. Men unload a train car full of "care packages" from the US. Women sort chocolate bars and other items from England on a conveyor belt. Men build Nissen huts for homeless Berliners. 02:35:48 Title: New York: Die Tagung der vereinten Nationen [The United Nations conference in New York]. A parade in New York on the occasion of the first meeting of the UN in that city. Various dignitaries ride down the street and wave to spectators. Arrival of the delegates at the building where the meeting will be held, in one of the buildings from the 1939 World's Fair. Foreign Minister Burns arrives, then Eleanor Roosevelt, Molotov, and the Trumans. Shot of Truman giving the opening speech. 02:37:42 Workers recycle old tires into shoe soles.