Anti-Jewish propaganda film: banking; government leaders

A propaganda film declared as a "documentary film contribution about the problem of world Judaism," in which antisemitic stereotypes are disseminated by the Nazis, including scenes showing: Poland as a nesting place for Judaism; the comparison of Jews with rats; the difference between Jews and Aryans; "international crime"; "financial Judaism"; "assimilated Jews"; the Jewish influence on economics, culture, and politics; and Jewish religious practice with a portrayal of haggling and misused sacred Jewish texts. REEL 4 Another extract from the feature film "The House of Rothschild" showing Rothschild on his deathbed advising his sons to set up banks in various European cities and by credit arrangements between their banks control the transfer of money. An animated diagram shows the dispersal of the five sons, with the commentary: "Nathan went to London and became and Englishman. Jakob went to Paris and became a Frenchman, [etc.] but they all remained Jews." An animated diagram illustrates the power and influence of Jewish banking families throughout Europe, Africa and America, with the narration: "Although they are only one percent of the population, with their capital they terrorize the world stock exchange, world opinion and world politics." American newsreel footage of New York City and the interior of the New York Stock Exchange, which is identified as the center of Jewish power. A montage of still photographs of influential Jewish Americans: Bernard Baruch, Otto Kahn, Felix Warburg, Mortimer Schiff, Samuel Untermeyer, Professor Felix Frankfurter, Herbert Lehmann, Fiorello La Guardia and Henry Morgenthau. Film of the former French Prime Minister Léon Blum. Footage of Leslie Hore-Belisha reviewing British troops. 00:30:40 Narrator: "But the Jew remains a rootless parasite, even when he is in power. His power comes not from his own strength, but lasts only as long as misled people are ready to carry him on their backs." Montage of images of seats of government, including the Houses of Parliament, the White House and the Reichstag, dissolving to an image of the dome of a synagogue topped with the Star of David. Title: "November 1918" appears with the commentary: "Remember those tragic days, when Germany lay helpless" over sequences from German newsreels, shots of soldiers and civilians on Unter den Linden, in front of the Brandenburg Gate and in the Wilhelmstrasse (Berlin). Title: "Elections to the National Assembly". Newsreel footage of the election for the Weimar National Assembly in 1919, crowds in the streets and lining up to vote, with the narration: "Then the Jews saw that their hour had come." Footage of prominent Jews, Otto Landsberger, Philip Scheidemann, Paul Hirsch, Georg Bernhard, Hugo Preuss, Walther Rathenau, Rudolf Hilferding and Bernhard Isidor Weiss. German newsreel footage of street scenes, public meetings and demonstrations with commentary about the radical agenda of the Jews, who "promised the masses golden mountains and incited them to break their chains of decency and order. Limitless personal freedom, denial of all ideals of duty, rejection of all higher values. Inciting the youth to class warfare and terror." Brief shot of the Reichstag followed by still photographs of communist Jews. Commentary: "it is no accident that these nation-destroying heretics have arisen from Jewish intellects." Stills and descriptions of: Karl Marx, Ferdinand Lasalle-Wolfson, Rosa Luxemburg, Eugen Levine-Nissen (Levine), David Frankfurter, Herschel Grynszpan.