Jewish National Fund, Paris (Fond 44)

Keren Kayemeth LeIsrael (Fond 44)

22 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

48,402 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The Jewish National Fund (Karen Kayemeth LeIsrael), was funded in 1901 by the Fifth Zionist Congress for the purchase of land in Palestine. The organization was ratified by the British government in 1907. The Jewish National Fund was led by committee of nine members elected by the general assembly of the World Zionist Organization. The Fund was engaged in the large scale on charitable contributions setting ubiquitous collection points for donations and organized festivals, lectures, made films etc. for purpose of collecting donations. The Jewish National Fund directed most of its resources to purchase of land in Palestine, as well irrigation projects, forestation, and the like. On the eve of the WWII more than third of the Jewish –held land in Palestine belonged to the Fund. The official organ of the JNF was the journal "Karnemu", and in France, the journal "La terre retrouve."

This collection contains office records of the Jewish National Foundation (Karen Kaemeth Leizrael, K.K.L.), whose headquarters were in Paris and which was known as the "Fund National Juif." Topics include meetings and conferences, activities of local branches, Zionist propaganda, the celebration of Jewish holidays, and raising money for Palestine. Documents include declarations; circular letters and instructions; activity reports; meeting minutes of the Executive Committee; lists of commissariats of the organization in France and North Africa; name lists of "authorized representatives" and "members"; correspondence with other international Zionist organizations; and trip reports. Also included are samples of the organization journals the "La terre retruve ", "Karnenu", "Mitteylungen", brochures, musical Jewish plays, stories and songs collection of songs and poems in Hebrew, and a collection "Little Illustration" ( la petit ilustración), published by K.K.L. for the purpose of carrying out Zionist propaganda. Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.