Records of the Executive Committee of the World Jewish Congress, Paris

Exekutivkomitee des Jüdischen Weltkongresses, Paris (Fond 1190)

33 microfilm reels (digitized), 16 mm

digital images,

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The World Jewish Congress (WJC) is an international organization founded by resolution of the First World jewish Congress, which took place in August 1936 in Geneva. The organization goal is to defend the political, social, and economic rights of Jews throughout the world. Its governing bodies were elected at the First World Jewish Congress: the executive committee headed by Stephen Wise (also the organization’s chairman), an administrative committee, headed by Nahum Goldman, and a central council headed by Louis Lipsky. At the first session of the executive committee, Sept. 6, 1936, it was decided to establish regional offices of the WJC in Geneva, New York, and London, and a central bureau in Paris. The central bureau coordinated the WJC’s work, collected information on the situation of Jews in various countries, published materials, and also lobbied at the League of Nations. In 1940, with the Second World War under way, the central bureau was transferred to New York, and a European office was established in London.

Records related to the organization of the First World Jewish Congress (WJC). Includes minutes of the sessions of the WJC central bureau and executive and administrative committees, accounts and correspondence related to the political and organizational activities of the Committee, letters, petitions, memoranda, and press releases related to the persecution of Jews in various countries, correspondence with Jewish organizations, international organization (League of Nations), government and public officials, lists of local WJC committee members and leaders of Jewish organizations in various countries, as well as lists of Jews from France and the Netherlands who added in the establishment of the WJC information center. Also contains numerous informational bulletins published by WJC, newspaper clippings, journals and pamphlets. All available records were copied as of 2017.