Nachman Zonabend papers

folders

3

Nachman (Natek) Zonabend (1918‐2006) was born in Łęczyca, Poland, to Abram and Malka Rosenberg Zonabend. His brothers were Tojwje, Wolf, Izak, and Noach, and his sisters were Szajna, Franka, and Bronka. His family moved to Łódź in 1936. He tried to escape to Warsaw in 1939, but he was captured by Germans, forced to walk to Pszczyna, escaped execution, returned to Łódź , and was forced into the ghetto in 1940. He worked in the ghetto post office and in a meat distribution center, and he was also involved with the underground project to establish an archives documenting Jewish life in the ghetto. He married Ita Kuperminc in January 1944. When the Łódź ghetto was liquidated in August 1944, Zonabend was left behind on a cleanup crew. He used the opportunity to slip into ghetto administrative offices to rescue the papers of Chaim Rumkowski and his administration as well as photographs, drawings, and paintings made by ghetto artists, and buried them in hiding places. He returned to the ghetto following the liberation of Łódź in January 1945 to rescue the hidden archives. He moved to Sweden in 1947. His parents and his sisters Szajna and Franka perished in the Holocaust.

The Nachman Zonabend papers consist of biographical materials, ration tickets, and photographs documenting Zonabend’s family from Łęczyca, Poland, his confinement to the Łódź ghetto and the work he performed there, his marriage to Ita Kuperminc, his liberation, and his work as photographer and collector of historical materials for the Main Historical Commission of the Central Committee of Jews in Poland. Biographical materials include identification papers, labor cards, and certificates documenting Zonabend’s confinement to the Łódź ghetto, the work he performed there, his marriage to Ita Kuperminc, his liberation, and his work as photographer and collector of historical materials for the Main Historical Commission of the Central Committee of Jews in Poland. Łódź ghetto tickets include two kinds of midday meal tickets and a ticket for a streetcar that ran through the ghetto. Photographs depict Nachman Zonabend with his family in Łęczyca, Zonabend in the Łódź ghetto with children, Pinchas (Swarc) Shaar, Ita Kuperminc, Josef Kowner, Irena Działoszyńska, and Anton Kraft in the ghetto, a meeting of the Central Jewish Historical Committee in Łódź after liberation, and Ita Kuperminc with three Soviet officers near a pile of skulls during the Soviet investigation of German war crimes at the alleged soap factory near Gdańsk. This series also includes a photograph by Mendel Grossman of a boy killed during the Gehsperre Aktion in September 1942.