Colman and Jean Steuer papers

folders

5

Colman Steuer (born Kalman Sztajer, 1920-2007) was born on 24 December 1920 in Sosnowiec, Poland to Nachum and Shprinza (née Berlinsky) Steuer. He had one sister, Julia, and two brothers, Aaron and Henry. Colman was raised in a Zionist home and was active in Hanoar Hatzioni. He met his future wife Jean Steuer (Genia Eckstein) in Sosnowiec prior to the war. After the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, Colman was sent to the Nisko labor camp in November. He was then sent to the Annaberg concentration camp in January 1940. He returned to the Sosnowiec ghetto in October 1942, and Colman and Jean were secretly married. They remained in the Sosnowiec ghetto until May 1943. Colman was deported to the Annaberg concentration camp and then transferred to the Buchenwald concentration camp in January 1945. He was liberated in May 1945. Colman’s parents and brothers all perished at the Auschwitz concentration camp. After liberation, Colman and Jean were reunited at the Bergen-Belsen displaced persons camp. They went to the Feldafing DP camp and immigrated to the United States in May 1954 aboard the SS Marine Perch. They settled in New York, briefly living with Colman’s aunt and uncle. In 1954 they moved to Plainfield, Connecticut and opened a chicken farm. They had one daughter, Sherry.

Jean Steuer (born Genia Eckstein, 1923-2018) was born on 23 February 1923 in Gleiwitz, Germany to Yitzchak and Szprinca (née Cukier) Eckstein. She had three older brothers: Sol, Henry, and Max. Jean grew up in Sosnowiec in an observant Jewish home. She met her future husband Colman Steuer (Kalman Sztajer) in Sosnowiec prior to the war. After the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, her brothers fled to Russia where the survived the war. Jean was deported to the Sosnowiec ghetto in January 1940. In 1942 Jean and Colman were secretly married in the ghetto. In May 1943 she was deported to the Annaberg concentration camp. She was later deported to the Gross-Rosen, Mauthausen, and Bergen-Belsen concentration camps. She was liberated from Bergen-Belsen in April 1945. Both of Jean’s parents perished during the Holocaust. After liberation, Colman and Jean were reunited at the Bergen-Belsen displaced persons camp. They went to the Feldafing DP camp and immigrated to the United States in May 1954 aboard the SS Marine Perch. They settled in New York, briefly living with Colman’s aunt and uncle. In 1954 they moved to Plainfield, Connecticut and opened a chicken farm. They had one daughter, Sherry.

The collection documents the pre-war and post-war experiences of Colman and Jean Steuer, originally of Sosnowiec, Poland. Documents include identification papers, including one from the Feldafing DP camp; immigration and naturalization papers; change of name affidavits; restitution paperwork; and tickets from the United Nations General Assembly, 28-29 November 1947. Photographs primarily consist of pre-war family photographs.