Prague uprising; American soldiers

Unassembled Czech newsreel material from the May uprising in Prague. A lone tank in the Old Town Square of Prague. Shots fired, smoke. WS, another tank in the square. Both fire. Jan Hus Memorial Monument in the center of the square. German tanks. Czechs use pickaxes to dig away at the stones in the street for use in barricades. Three men emerge from a car, two in uniform. People continue working away at the sidewalk. Crowds of Czechs at Wenceslas Square. Officers, pistols in hand, lead a man out of a building with his hands raised above his head, loaded into a car. People carrying bags of goods are directed through an open gate by an officer. Building barricades. People with armbands in rows. Tanks. Soldiers march with belongings. A soldier looks through binoculars. View from train as a soldiers march along dirt road. Barricades in the streets of Prague. Soldiers smoke cigarettes. A woman repairs a soldier’s uniform. Displaced German women and children. Barricades on Prague streets, boxes and chains. An officer leads a couple down a Prague street, people line the way with guns, gesturing for them to move along. The officer holds a portrait of Adolf Hitler. Long line of soldiers. Man sits on top of a military car. Soldier points his gun out of a window. Tanks. People building up the barricades. They pass along material in an assembly line. Soldiers surround a man with his hands tied behind his back. People put furniture on the barricade piles, including couches, wood, carts. A barricaded street, St. Nicholas Church in the BG. Rooftop. Smoke rises. A man runs across an empty street. Crowds. Damaged buildings in Prague. A Czech flag. Crowd waves excitedly as cars move through. Officers exit vehicles. Jeep with American soldiers, journalists. Man with armband, red cross. Men and young boys look at the camera smile and raise their arms in cheer. A fire truck drives through a cleared pathway in a barricade. Corpses. Parents of dead daughter, woman sings. People place flowers on the bodies. A small crowd outside “ANTONIN CHMEL” shop.