Lübschütz and Urman families papers

folders

2

Jutte Lübschütz, later Judy Urman, was born in 1927 to Julius (1889-1976) and Else (née Marcus, 1888-1970) Lübschütz in Magdeburg, Germany. Jutta and her sister Ruth (1922-1944) were raised in Schönebeck where their parents were the proprietors of Säckegroßhandlung Marcus & Co., a company founded by Jutta's maternal grandfather. While Else Lübschütz descended from a family with local ties, Julius, originally from Stargard in Pomerania, settled in the area after WWI. Throughout the 1930s Jutta and her family experienced growing antisemitism within their community. While their parents were able to operate the family business until 1938, Ruth was forced to give up her training as a medical assistant and Jutta experienced increasing discrimination in school. During Kristallnacht Julius was arrested and sent to Buchenwald where he was detained for 3 weeks. In order to secure her husband's release Else pursued the family's emigration from Germany. Else was successful in obtaining passage for Julius to Shanghai and in March 1939 he emigrated from Germany. At that time Else and Jutta relocated to Hamburg where they joined Ruth and her husband Max Nathan (1911-1944). The following year Else and Jutta secured passage to Shanghai to join Julius. Ruth and Max, who had plans to immigrate to the United States, remained in Germany. While interned in the Shanghai ghetto Jutta and her parents continued to receive correspondence from their loved ones in Europe. This contact continued until 1942 when Ruth and Max were deported from Hamburg to Theresienstadt. The family later learned that the couple and their three young children, Uri (1939-1944), Judis (1941-1944), and Gideon (1942-1944) were deported to Auschwitz where they perished. After the war Jutta married Ernst Urmann (1925-2013), a Jewish refugee who had fled to Shanghai from Vienna. In 1948 the couple immigrated to Israel where they had their first child, a daughter named Ruth. In 1952 Jutta, Ernst, and Ruth immigrated to the United States and were reunited with Else and Julius. Jutta and Ernst later adopted the names Judy and Ernest Urman. The couple went on to welcome two sons, Frank and Danny, and settled in Colorado.

The Lübschütz and Urman families papers consist of documents and correspondence of the Lübschütz and Urman families, formerly of Schönebeck, Germany and Vienna, Austria, and later of the United States. Included is a certificate awarding Julius Lübschütz the Ehrenkreuz für Frontkämpfer (Honor Cross); a Kinderausweis (child identity document) issued to Jutta Lübschütz (later Judy Urman); a copy of a document issued by the Japanese Consulate-General permitting Jutta Lübschütz entry to Shanghai; a postwar postcard from the Red Cross informing the Lübschütz family that Ruth Lübschütz Nathan was deported to Auschwitz in 1944; an envelope addressed to Olga Urman from Max Urman sent while Max was interned at Dachau; and a Chinese identification card and residency certificate issued to Ernst Urman.