Central Committee of the Jews in Poland (CKŻP). Productivity Department

Centralny Komitet Żydów Polskich (CKŻP). Wydział Produktywizacji (Sygn. 303/XII)

12,467 digital images, JPEG

11 microfilm reels (digitized), 35 mm

Żydowski Instytut Historyczny im. Emanuela Ringelbluma

The Central Committee of Polish Jews also referred to as the Central Committee of Jews in Poland and abbreviated CKŻP, (Polish: Centralny Komitet Żydów w Polsce, Yiddish: צענטראל קאמיטעט פון די יידן אין פוילן‎; tr: Centraler Komitet fun di Jidn in Pojln) was a state-sponsored political representation of Jews in Poland at the end of World War II. It was established on November 12, 1944, as the successor of the Provisional Central Committee of Polish Jews formed a month earlier under the umbrella of the communist Polish Committee of National Liberation (PKWN). The CKŻP provided care and assistance to Jews who survived the Holocaust. It legally represented all CKŻP-registered Polish Jews in their dealings with the new government and its agencies. It existed until 1950 when, together with the Jewish Cultural Society, representatives of CKŻP founded the Socio-Cultural Association of Jews in Poland [Source: Wikipedia] The Centralny Komitet Żydów w Polsce, CKŻP (Central Committee of Jews in Poland) was the most prominent official Jewish institution in Poland following the Holocaust.  CKŻP attended to the needs of Jews from fall 1944 until 1950. It sponsored a variety of programs, providing food, shelter, education, medical assistance, cultural activities, and employment services and vocational training. The CKŻP also supervised the repatriation of Jews from the Soviet Union and assisted with legal emigration. A government‐funded body, it was supported financially by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee.

Records of the Wydział Produktywizacji of the Centralny Komitet Żydów w Polsce (CKŻP) (Central Committee of Polish Jews): employment offices, vocational courses, production co-ops, individual workshops, farms, financial aid for enterprises, and statistics.