Collection of Egon Michael Zweig and family

Sammlung Egon Michael Zweig und familie (P 149)

10,468 digital images, JPEG

Arkhiyon ha-merkazi le-toldot ha-ʻam ha-Yehudi

Egon Michael Zweig was born in Olomouc (Olmütz), Czech Republic in 1877 as the son of Sigmund and Josefine Zweig (née Doctor) born. He studied law in Vienna. Egon Zweig remained in Vienna after graduation and worked there in the early 20th century as court and court advocate with his own law firm. Already at the age of 19 years was he was active in the Zionist movement of Vienna, among other things, he was a member of "Zion Association", the "Zionist Association of Austria" and the "Central Zionist Association." In 1918 he founded the first Palestine office outside of Palestine in Vienna. In the board elections of the Jewish Community Vienna 1906 he was branch Secretary for the Zionist and opposition electoral committee, and was Secretary of the District Commission of the III and XI (Israelitische Kultusgemeinde Wien and the Jewish-Democratic Kultuswahlkomitee), 1910. In 1920, Egon Zweig settled in The Hague, where he was on the board of directors of "Keren Kajemeth Lejisrael." In 1922, Zweig immigrated with his family to Israel and lived in the Jerusalem district Talpiot. He worked as a lawyer at "Keren Kajemeth" in Jerusalem. Egon Zweig died in March 1949. Further details about Zweig's family relationships are included in Zweig family archive. [Refrences: The Central Archives for the History of the Jewish People Jerusalem (CAHJP)]

Genealogical documents, correspondence, photographs, published materials, records related to the political activities in Zionist movements, and claims of the Zweig family related to losses in WWII. Included are also records related to the Jewish organizations and Israeli religious community Vienna (Austria) and Olomouc (Czech Republic) and other organizations, also miscellaneous materials like: a map of the district Talpioth in Jerusalem with marking of all plots, publications in German newspaper, a bulletin of the Mitteilungsblatt des Heimatverbandes Olmütz und Mittelmähren (Homeland Association Olomouc and Central Moravia), 1962-1965, and handwritten music notes for German songs. File 96 includes manuscript copies of mostly published compositions for Viennese zither: Wilhelm Holler, Elfengesang am Traunsee (for zither), Vienna, 1861; A. J. Paschinger, Schweizer Echolied (Vienna, 1888); Zillerthaler Marsch (Austrian, traditional); Unidentified; Carl Michael Ziehrer, Das liegt bei uns im Blut, Op.372 (Vienna, n.d.); E. Y. Nikl, Vor da Miazl ihr’n Fensterl! (ca. 1896).