Union of Berlin Zionists

Berliner Zionistische Vereinigung (Fond 713)

4 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

3,438 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The Berlin Zionist Union (BZU), a local chapter of the Zionist Federation of Germany, was founded in 1897 at the initiative of Heinrich Lowe. According to its charter, the BZU aimed to support the creation of a Jewish national home in Palestine. The union sought to assist in the settlement of Palestine, strengthen Jewish national selfconsciousness, and propagate Zionist ideology in Germany. Membership in the BZU was open to any Jew who in his or her application indicated agreement with the basic principles of the Basel Platform. The BZU was led by a board, composed of a chairman and between five and seven board members and elected by a delegate assembly (Vertretersammlung). Together with the delegate assembly, the board decided the personal composition of the finance committee, the Palestine committee, the committee on the Hebrew language and cultural work, the propaganda committee, the committee on work with Jews from the countries of the East, and the committee on youth work. The BZU was reorganized in 1932. The union was led in the interwar period by B. Cohen, S. Chertok, and A. Schwarz. It published the weekly newspaper, Nachrichtenblatt der BZU (1922), and the weekly Berliner Jüdische Zeitung (1929-30). The BZU was disbanded in 1938 soon after Kristallnacht. [Source: “Nazi-Looted Jewish Archives in Moscow. A guide to Jewish Historical and Cultural Collections in the Russian State Military Archive”, ed. by D. E. Fishman, M. Kupovetsky, V. Kuzelenkov. “Nazi-Looted Jewish Archives in Moscow. A guide to Jewish Historical and Cultural Collections in the Russian State Military Archive”, ed. by D. E. Fishman, M. Kupovetsky, V. Kuzelenkov. Scranton : University of Scranton Press in association with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum and The Jewish Theological Seminary, 2010]

The collection includes the organization's statute; meeting minutes; correspondence with other Zionist organizations such as the Jewish National Fund (Ḳeren ḳayemet le-Yiśraʼel); correspondence with members regarding their financial contributions to assist individuals' efforts to obtain travel documents to Palestine; directives on Hebrew instruction; financial accounts; various reports by other organizations including an activity report of the section for emigration of the Agudat Israel, a Jewish orthodox organization in Vienna, and a 1936 report by the chairman of the Jewish Agency for Palestine; instructions on the selection of delegates to the 19th and 20th (1937) Zionist Congresses; name lists of members; brochures in Hebrew about a Zionist congress; materials of the Zionistische Vereinigung für Deutschland (ZVfD), including the 25th ZVfD Congress showing friction among religious Zionists, non-religious Zionists, and non-Zionists; an audit of the ZVfD youth group; and an index to ZVfD archival materials. Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.