Wanda Zofia Ciecierska papers

box

oversize boxes

1

2

Wanda Zofia Ciecierska (1921-1991) was born Wanda Zofia Weber on April 13, 1921 in Warsaw, Poland to Roman Catholic couple Karol Weber and Teodozia Kulesza. She studied at the Zofia Kurmanowa school and Warsaw Nursing School during the Nazi occupation while also working at the Polish Red Cross Hospital. During the Warsaw Uprising, she continued to work at the Red Cross Hospital as well as for the Polish Home Army. After the Germans burned down the hospital, she was transported with other hospital personnel to hospitals in Wola and Milanówek. She fled Warsaw to join relatives in Skierniewice and then Krakow, but she was arrested in January 1945. She was held at Prądnik Biały for two weeks, transferred to a transit camp in Dresden, and then performed forced labor at the Petzold factory in Grunhain until liberation by the American Army. After the war she worked in an American Army unit kitchen and then as a nurse at the UNRRA hospital in Ganacker and the IRO hospital in Regensburg. She fought to be recognized as a displaced person. She married Stanislaw Ciecierski on August 12, 1946 at the Ganacker displaced persons camp. Stanislaw Ciecierski (1921-1986) was born October 21, 1921 in Krasnoyarsk, Russia. His Polish father, Wacław Ciecierski, and Russian mother, Olga Kudrjawzew, were Catholic, and he had at least one brother, Włodzimierz, born January 18, 1916. He grew up in Poznań, which became the capital of Reichsgau Wartheland during World War II. He was exempt from hard labor during the war due to a heart condition, and he worked for the Grundstücksgesellschaft für den Reichsgau Wartheland, a real estate company involved in the expropriation of Polish assets. His father was arrested in 1943 and sent to Pawiak prison and then to the Auschwitz concentration camp, where he is believed to have perished. Stanislaw moved to Ronneburg near the end of the war and was recognized as a stateless displaced person after the war. He married Wanda Zofia Weber in 1946, and the couple moved to Straubing. They immigrated to the United States with the help of the National Catholic Welfare Conference, sailing from Bremerhaven to New York in August 1949 aboard the USAT General Ballou.

The Wanda Zofia Ciecierska papers consist of biographical materials, correspondence, photographs, printed material, and writings documenting Ciecierska’s experiences in Nazi-occupied Warsaw and during the Warsaw Uprising, as a forced laborer in Germany, and as a displaced person after the war. The papers also document her husband Stanislaw Ciecierski and his experiences in Nazi-annexed Poznań and as a displaced person in Germany. Biographical materials include marriage certificates, immigration, immunization, and travel records for Wanda Zofia and Stanislaw. Additional wartime records documenting Wanda Zofia include certificates regarding her wartime nursing education and work at the Polish Red Cross Hospital, orders to report for trench digging following the Warsaw Uprising, transportation vouchers, and permits and a payroll record for the Petzold factory. Postwar records include an AEF assembly center registration card, certificates documenting her kitchen work for an American Army unit and nursing work for the UNRRA hospital in Ganacker and IRO hospital in Regensburg, her appeal to be recognized as a displaced person, and a Polish Veteran’s Association membership card. Records documenting Stanislaw include his 1934 scouting card; notifications explaining his Polish and Russian heritage and his work for the Grundstücksgesellschaft, postwar identification cards, medical records documenting his treatment for diphtheria, correspondence about his use of an apartment and furniture formerly appropriated by Nazis whose owner requested their return, and a letter documenting problems with his wife’s travel permit. This series also includes a registration certificate documenting Włodzimierz Ciecierski’s visit from Straubing to Hof. The small correspondence series primarily consists of postcards exchanged among Ciecierski and Weber relatives after the war. Photographic materials include two photographs albums documenting Stanislaw and Wanda Zofia Ciecierski in Poland, Germany, and America at the end of World War II, during the early postwar years, and through their immigration to the United States. Photographs depict the couple in street scenes and countryside scenes, aboard a train and a boat, and with nursing and hospital staff. Loose photographs include the couple’s parents, their wedding, a photograph of the IRO hospital staff, and additional family and friends. Printed material includes Catholic imagery; newspaper clippings; commemorative stamps and a postcard celebrating the anniversary of the liberation of Dachau; postcards picturing scenes in Poland, Germany, and New York City; a sticker depicting the Polish emblem and eagle, and a leaflet describing the National Catholic Welfare Conference and its War Relief Services. The writings series includes handwritten and typed cookbooks, five handwritten diaries, two notebooks containing poetry and addresses, and loose song lyrics and poems primarily documenting Wanda Zofia’s experiences as a forced laborer in Grunhain and as a displaced person after the war. Most of the material is in Polish.