Testimony of Józef Kuźba: Konzentrationslager Sachsenhausen, Oranienburg b. Berlin. As remains in our memory. Materials, experiences, comments.

Relacja Józefa Kuźba: Konzentrationslager Sachsenhausen, Oranienburg b. Berlin. Jaki pozostal w naszej pamięci. Materialy, przeżycia, komentarze

356 digital images, PDF

Fundacja Polsko-Niemieckie Pojednanie

Józef Kuźba was born in what is now the province of Pomerania, Poland, in August 1916, and died on 30 October, 2012. Trained as a teacher, and therefore belonging to the Polish intelligentsia, he found himself to be part of a group that was targeted for extermination immediately following the German invasion of Poland in 1939. Because of this, he escaped to Slovakia in 1940, where he was subsequently captured and deported to the Sachsenhausen concentration camp near Berlin. While imprisoned there for five years, he worked in the brickyard. In early 1945 he was among those prisoners who were sent on a death march, from which he was liberated by the U.S. Army in May of that year. He returned to Poland, where after the war he worked as an economist. During retirement he was a social worker, devoting himself mainly to working with German youth, and in particular working on causes related to Polish-German reconciliation. A lengthy (7 hours, 15 minutes) oral history interview was conducted with Józef Kuźba, which is available in the Archives of the Oral History Centre KARTA and the Meeting House with History in Warsaw ( track number: AHM_1122). For more information: http: // .fpnp.pl / witnesses / jozef-kuzba.html; http://www.asf-ev.de/de/einblicke/weggefaehrt-innen/jozef-kuzba-reden-ist-meine-pflicht.html).

Testimony of Józef Kuźba (1916-2012), a teacher and wartime inmate of the Sachsenhausen concentration camp. The testimony contains the author's memoirs together with vast information from historical sources and other archival materials. The typewritten text (356 pages) contains photographs, documents, clippings, etc. Józef Kuźba wrote his testimony in 1995 and entitled it “Konzentrationslager Sachsenhausen, Oranienburg b. Berlin. Jaki Pozostal w Naszej Pamięci. Materialy, Przeżycia, Komentarze."