Dreier and Tarnowski families papers

box

1

The Dreier and Tarnowski families came from East and West Prussia and Pomerania. Martin Dreier was born in 1911 in Schokken (now Skoki, Poland) to Max Dreier (1879-?) and Netty Fuchs Dreier (1889-1944). Martin moved to England in 1939 and immigrated to the United States in 1944 or 1946. Max and Netty Dreier were both deported to the Warsaw Ghetto in April 1942 and to Theresienstadt that August. In October 1944 Netty was deported to Auschwitz, where she died. Martin's mother-in-law, Taübchen Tützer, was born in 1878 in Czarnikau (now Czarnków, Poland). Her daughter, Edith Tützer, married Siegfried Tarnowski, and they lived in Piaski, Poland with their daughter Ruth. All four are believed to have perished in the Lublin Ghetto. Siegfried's sister, Elli Tarnowski Burchardy, moved to Shanghai with her husband, Alfred Burchardy. Siegfried and Elli's parents, Flora and Wolff Tarnowski, lived in Stargard in Pomerania (now Stargard Szczeciński, Poland) and died in early 1940.

The Dreier and Tarnowski families papers measure 0.5 linear foot and date from approximately 1939‐1944. The collection includes correspondence and photographs documenting the Dreier and Tarnowski families, their hardships in East and West Prussia and Pomerania under Nazi rule, and their efforts to emigrate. Correspondence primarily consists of letters to Elli and Alfred Burchardy in Shanghai from Flora and Wolff Tarnowski in Stargard, from Edith and Siegfried Tarnowski and Taübchen Tützer in Piaski, and from other family members and friends in Stargard, Piaski, and various cities in Germany. These letters document emigration efforts, family health concerns, and the difficulties of Jewish life under Nazi rule. The collection also contains correspondence between Max and Netty Dreier and their children, including two postcards from Theresienstadt, and official correspondence with Siegfried and Flora Tarnowski about ensuring that the Buchardys received their household goods and transferred money in Shanghai. Photographs depict Netty Dreier, Edith, Siegfried, Ruth, and Taübchen Tützer.