Lichtenstein family photograph collection

folder

1

Israel Lichtenstein was born on November 11, 1932 in Paris, France. His father, Menachem Mendel, born on January 11, 1908, in Plock, Poland, was the son of a rabbi and had eight siblings. Menachem was religiously liberal and a committed Zionist. He met Shifra Kasimersky, born 1909, in Jaloshitsha, Poland; her parents had died in the 1918 typhus epidemic. Menachem and Shifra travelled to Italy, where they married in 1931-32. They hoped to get immigration certificates for Palestine, but were not able to do so and instead emigrated to Paris. After the establishment of the Nazi dictatorship in Germany in 1933, Menachem’s father and several of his brothers joined the couple in Paris. Menachem was a skilled artisanal tricoteur or knitter. He also served as secretary treasurer of the Poalei Zion, a socialist Zionist movement in France. When France declared war on Germany in September 1939, Menachem and his brothers enlisted in the French Army. During this time, Shifra lived alone and had to work to support herself and her young son. In 1939, she sent Israel to an orphanage in Montmorency. He was the only French born child there; all the others were Jewish refugees from Austria and Germany. Following the German invasion of France in May 1940, the orphanage was evacuated and the children were sent to the Masgelier children's home run by Oeuvre de Secours des Enfants (OSE). After France surrendered to Germany in June, his father was demobilized. He returned to Paris and registered with the police as required by law. On May 14, 1941, he was arrested and sent to the Beaune-la-Rolande internment camp. On June 27, 1942, he was deported to Auschwitz death camp, where he was killed. Since Israel knew that his mother was now alone, he requested permission to return to Paris to live with her. After spending a few days with his grandfather in Pujaudran, a small village near Toulouse, Israel returned to Paris in February/ March 1942. He was forced to wear a Jewish star, but was allowed to attend school. On July 16, 1942, Shifra was warned by a shopkeeper that the Germans were rounding up Jews throughout the city. She and Israel went into hiding with neighbors. Then they fled south to the unoccupied zone with Shifra's sister-in-law and her two sons, Marcel and Joseph. They were arrested by French police at the demarcation line, and sent to a hotel in Chateauroux. Learning that they were to be sent to the Nexon internment camp, Shifra decided that Israel should return to his grandfather’s with his older cousin, Marcel. After they arrived in Pujaudran, their grandfather decided that the boys would be safer in the care of OSE and told them to return to Masgelier. Their families were sent from Chateauroux to the Rivesaltes and then Gurs concentration camps. Joseph was released from the camp and permitted to join the other boys in Masgelier, where they stayed from July 1942 to May 1943. At that point, their mothers managed to bribe their way out of camp and obtain false papers. They fled to Pujaudran and were soon joined by the boys. The families remained together until liberation in late summer 1944, and then they returned to Paris. Israel's grandfather became the secretary of the rabbinic council in Paris. Israel finished high school and attended medical school. He later immigrated to Israel.

The collections consists of seven photographs documenting the experiences of Israel Lichtenstein and his family in the Beaune-la-Rolande transit camp and at the Masgelier children's home in France during the Holocaust.