I'm An American -- Frank Capra

On March 23, 1941 Frank Capra spoke with William Carmichael, of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, about his experience in America. Capra tells Mr. Carmichael how he and his family came to America. He reveals how hard work and determination allowed him to have his “American Dream”. The movie producer explain why he believes his films are considered Americana. Capra also shares his thought on Hollywood being criticized as un-American, communist and fascist. He tells Mr. Carmichael that America has an obligation to show to the world how democracy works. The distinguished movie producer closes the program by quoting Abraham Lincoln as saying, “No man is good enough to govern another.” Frank Capra (b. Francesco Rosario Capra) was born on May 18, 1897 in Bisacquino, Sicily, Italy to a Roman Catholic family. In 1903, Capra and his family emigrated to the United States aboard the steamship Germania. Of the trip Capra says, “There's no ventilation, and it stinks like hell. They're all miserable. It's the most degrading place you could ever be.” The Capra family eventually settled in Southern California where Frank’s older brother was living. To earn money Frank sold newspapers, played music in LA’s red light district and worked as a janitor in the mornings at his high school. Capra graduated and enrolled in Throop College of Technology in 1915 where he discovered a love for poetry and writing. Capra enlisted in the Army in 1917 and became a naturalized citizen in 1920. In 1922, the aspiring director convinced a new film studio to let him direct their film. He collaborated with screenwriter Robert Riskin and released "American Madness" (1932). The long standing partnership between the two men led to a social consciousness which became a blueprint for future works. His most beloved films were patriotic, sentimental and made during the Great Depression. Capra went on to become the most prominent filmmaker of the 1930s, winning three Academy Awards as Best Director.