Memorial service for victims of Lidice; German troops leave Holland; Threat of plague in Germany

The Welt im Film [World in Film] newsreel series was produced by the American and British military governments to support the denazification campaign in Germany and Austria. Screening was compulsory in cinemas in the American and British zones of Germany until the late 1940s.

Welt im Film. Issue no. 10 (part) Title: In Memory of Lidice. A large crowd of people, many of whom are weeping, at a memorial service for the victims of Lidice. The narrator provides the story of the Lidice massacre: the Germans destroyed the town of Lidice and killed most of the inhabitants in reprisal for the assasination of Reinhard Heydrich in June, 1942. Czech president Edvard Benes walks in a procession. Shots of many wreaths and flags at half-mast. 01:10:08 Title: German Troops Leave Holland. German troops on a ship and on land as they leave Holland to return to Germany. Dutch citizens watch as the troops march through a village. The narrator notes that the Germans pass through the village in silence. Shot of an eagle and swastika adorned with a gas mask and American helmet. The German troops pass a sign that reads: "You are back in Germany. Don't fraternize." 01:11:48 Title: Camera Survey Venice. Damage to ships in the harbor and buildings in Venice. Allied soldiers ride boats in the Venice canals. The narrator states that Venice has become a place of pilgrimage and rest for these men. An American flag hangs from the window of a house. A canal crowded with gondolas carrying American soldiers. Shots of buildings that front the canal, filmed from a gondola. 01:14:05 Title: Allies Combat Plague Threat. Scenes of destuction while the narrator says that conditions in Germany could lead to typhus. Germans in line to receive water. A sign warns of the danger of typhus. A man wearing a gas mask leads a horse-drawn cart full of corpses down a road (probably concentration camp victims). Shots of Germans, including children, being deloused with DDT.