The World Jewish Congress New York Office records. Series F (Organization Department)

30,343 digital images, JPEG

34 microfilm reels, 35 mm

5 CD-ROMs, 4 3/4 in.

American Jewish Archives

The World Jewish Congress (WJC) is an international organization founded by resolution of the First World jewish Congress, which took place in August 1936 in Geneva. The organization goal is to defend the political, social, and economic rights of Jews throughout the world. Its governing bodies were elected at the First World Jewish Congress: the executive committee headed by Stephen Wise (also the organization’s chairman), an administrative committee, headed by Nahum Goldman, and a central council headed by Louis Lipsky. At the first session of the executive committee, Sept. 6, 1936, it was decided to establish regional offices of the WJC in Geneva, New York, and London, and a central bureau in Paris. The central bureau coordinated the WJC’s work, collected information on the situation of Jews in various countries, published materials, and also lobbied at the League of Nations. In 1940, with the Second World War under way, the central bureau was transferred to New York, and a European office was established in London.

Contains records relating to activities of the Organization Department: fundraising (until May, 1946); producing reports on WJC activities for affiliates and on the situation of Jewish communities world wide; organizing commemorations (notably for anniversaries of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising) and celebrations; preparing for plenary assemblies and conferences; and maintaining relations with other Jewish organizations. Included in the series is correspondence with or about communities; records concerning commemorations, conferences, and affiliation; together with mimeographed materials (“stencils”) in the form of reports, form letters to affiliates, and memos to the Office and Executive Committees. Sub-series 1. Executive Files, 1942-1976, consists of correspondence and reports for Issac Schwartzbart, Robert S. Serebrenick, and Saul Sokal. The files in this sub-series deal with individuals, organizations, departments, subjects, publications, and countries. Sub-series 2. Office Files, 1944-1973 consists of office correspondence and files regarding the Organization Department's work throughout the world. The sub-series begins with general correspondence arranged chronologically, followed by files on individuals, organizations and departments, countries, topics (including conferences and commemorations - notably Warsaw Ghetto uprising anniversaries), reports, and publications. Sub-series 3. General Files, 1946-1960 consists of general correspondence files of the Organization Department. These files are arranged chronologically from June 1946 through 1960, when the department moved to Geneva.