Invasion of Norway

The German invasion of Norway, which happened on April 9, 1940, simultaneous with the invasion of Denmark. The Norwegians offered much more resistance than the Danes, and they did not capitulate until May 9. Airplanes in the air. Interior of the plane with German soldiers, smiling and talking. The plane lands on an airfield on the coast of Norway and the troops disembark and gather their weapons and equipment. They march away from the airport, to "occupy the important military points in the area of the airport." View of Norway from an airplane. The planes drop bombs on targets near Oslo. The bombing is shown from various perspectives, including a brief shot of a bomb from inside the plane as it is dropped. After the bombing, German troops land in Oslo without resistance, according to the narrator. German troops on a ship; unloading vehicles, consulting maps. A panning view across the city of Oslo, across cargo from a ship, and across German soldiers, some with bicycles, behind a fenced enclosure. Perhaps the entrance to the harbor and they are preparing to enter Oslo? German ships in the Bergen harbor. German soldiers ferried into Bergen harbor in a small motor boat; one soldier looks through binoculars at the tall snow-capped mountains. Soldiers unloading equipment and supplies and interacting with the Norwegian population. The narrator notes that German transport ships and troops are arriving in the important harbors of Norway, over a shot of soldiers disembarking and tanks, vehicles, and horses being unloaded from ships. 01:08:23 Germans marching down a road in Norway, singing. The narrator describes the Norwegian soldiers who are resisting as being influenced by "English agents" and radio broadcasts out of London. Shot of a badly damaged vehicle that was attacked by Norwegian troops. However, after a "short but difficult" fight, the resisters give themselves up. The Germans treat them very politely. They are arrested and searched as a light snow falls. The Germans confiscate their weapons in a civilized and orderly manner. Ship after ship carrying German soldiers traveling toward Norway, accompanied by merry martial music. German soldiers waving from the deck of a ship at the camera. Panning shot of German ships in a Norwegian harbor. More unloading of supplies, soldiers marching, general display of material and human military might. Long view of a railroad bridge between Oslo and (Lille)hammer (?). Detailed view of the bridge, which was destroyed by the Norwegian forces to try and stop the German forward march. This was in vain, as the narrator points out, because "Railroad Pioneers," who gained experience in the Polish campaign, quickly create a new passage. Various views of soldiers building a new path, then traveling along it. Horse-drawn wagons travel along a snowy road, higher into the mountains. German troops clad in white-covered helmets and white ponchos march up a hill, dragging a sled with supplies. The narrator states that only the most experienced troops can handle this duty. They discover a building containing a cache of weapons, which they confiscate. Germans engaged with the enemy, shooting howitzers. Destroyed buildings and terrible scenes of devastation in Elverum, where the Norwegian government had moved after the occupation of Oslo. The narrator describes Elverum as being the center of resistance and the "Englandhoriger" (enslaved by England) Norwegian government. A few views of the Norwegian landscape around Lillehammer, followed by a shot of a column of Norwegian POWs. The narrator states that at Lillehammer, the Germans captured English forces, documents, and plans. Shots of British POWs. German forces in large numbers marching and driving horse-drawn carts down a road, having defeated the English forces. The narrator says that southern and middle Norway are in German hands. Views of a "British munitions depot" that was captured by the Germans. More British POWs, walking down a road under German guard, including one who is limping and is being supported by a fellow prisoner. Truckloads of POWs on their way to a collection point. A crowd of British POWs, one of whom is being interviewed in English about the humane treatment and good provisions he has received at the hands of the Germans. The scene ends with the large group of POWs and German soldiers, laughing and smiling, all singing "It's a Long Way to Tipperary." Shots of German soldiers walking amongst still-burning pieces of enemy aircraft that have been shot down "before they could start their destruction work." Various views of German planes flying and dropping bombs. They bomb a fleet of enemy transport ships.