Mister C

Aleksander (Alexander) Kulisiewicz (1918-1982) was born in Kraków, Poland in 1918. He was a law student in German-occupied Poland when, in October 1939, he was denounced for antifascist writings, arrested by the Gestapo, and sent to the Sachsenhausen concentration camp, near Berlin. An amateur singer and songwriter, Kulisiewicz composed 54 songs during more than five years of imprisonment at Sachsenhausen. After Russian troops liberated the camp on May 2, 1945, he remembered his songs, as well as those learned from fellow prisoners, dictating hundreds of pages of text to his attending nurse at a Polish infirmary. The majority of Kulisiewicz’s songs are darkly humorous ballads concerning the sadistic treatment of prisoners. Performed at secret gatherings, imbued with biting wit and subversive attitude, these songs helped inmates cope with their hunger and despair, raised morale, and offered hope of survival. Beyond this spiritual and psychological purport, Kulisiewicz also considered the camp song to be a form of documentation. “In the camp,” he wrote, “I tried under all circumstances to create verses that would serve as direct poetical reportage. I used my memory as a living archive. Friends came to me and dictated their songs.” In the 1950s, Kulisiewicz began amassing a private collection of music, poetry, and artwork created by camp prisoners, gathering this material through correspondence and hundreds of hours of recorded interviews. In the 1960s, he inaugurated a series of public recitals of his repertoire of camp songs, and issued several recordings. Kulisiewicz’s major project, a monumental study of the cultural life of the camps and the vital role music played as a means of survival for many prisoners, remained unpublished at the time of his death. He toured both Europe and the United States performing concerts of his works and the works of other Holocaust survivors until about 1980. He died in Kraków, Poland, on March 12, 1982. His archive is the largest extant collection of music composed in the camps.

The subject of this song is Winston Churchill, the cigar-chomping British prime minister who between the fall of France and the United States' entry into World War II personified captive Europe's last hope for defeating the Germans. Written soon after news reached Sachsenhausen of the Allied evacuation from Dunkirk in May 1940, “Mister C” debuted at an informal musical evening in Cell Block 3 where, to cite Kulisiewicz, “the most biting and obscene antifascist satires were performed in several languages.” Kulisiewicz further recalls that he would pantomime rowing gestures and whisper “Dunkirk” when performing the last verse of the song. The coded phrase “Eastern Wind,” also in the final verse, alludes to possible aid from the Soviet Union, despite the Hitler-Stalin nonaggression treaty then still in effect. Kulisiewicz's reference in verse 4 to the “Isle of Rugia”—the German Baltic island Rügen—evokes an ancient clash of Slavic and German interests over this borderland territory.