Hauptreuhandstelle Ost. Treuhandstelle Danzig-Westpreussen

Selected records of the Main Trustee Office for the East, Trustee Office for Gdańsk-West Prussia

Główny Urząd Powierniczy Wschód Gdańsk-Prusy Zachodnie (Sygn. 264)

3 microfilm reels, 35 mm

Archiwum Państwowe w Gdańsku

Hauptreuhandstelle Ost. Treuhandstelle Danzig-Westpreussen (Główny Urząd Powierniczy Wschód Gdańsk-Prusy Zachodnie; Main Trustee Office for the East, Trustee Office for Danzig-West Prussia) was established in November 1939 to take over and manage confiscated Polish state and private property in the occupied territories and include it in the Nazi military economy. Confiscated property was handed over to the receivership, lease or sale to German citizens, including repatriated from the Baltic countries and Bessarabia. Agricultural and forestry properties were excluded from the competence of the Trustee's Office. They were governed by the Reich Commissioner's Office for the Strengthening of the German. Local custodian offices in 1941 were under the supervision of the Reich Governor's Office. The custodian office in Gdańsk included the District of West Prussia. This office was in charge of the Branch Office in Gdynia and a “Man of Trust” in particular districts.

Selected records of the Hauptreuhandstelle Ost. Treuhandstelle Danzig-Westpreussen (Główny Urząd Powierniczy Wschód Gdańsk-Prusy Zachodnie) include provisions regarding the rules of taking over Polish and Jewish property on the territory Gdańsk Pomerania. Included are regulations concerning the Polish State, Polish real estate, agricultural land, organizational, administrative and economic matters, financial economy, tasks of commissarial administrators and national politics, treatment of Poles and Jews in the Free City of Gdańsk; it also contains correspondence regarding matters of Polish property seized by Germany, opinions regarding nationalities (letters T-Z), and official communicates. A majority part of the collection consists of card files related to the takeover of individual companies and realties on the Gdańsk Pomerania.