August Bohny-Reiter papers

Nachlass August Bohny-Reiter (1919-2016)

5,381 digital images, PDF

Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich. Archiv für Zeitgeschichte - Archivleitung

August Bohny-Reiter (1919-2016) was born in Switzerland, educated to be a primary school teacher, and then served in the Swiss military. In the summer of 1941, he served as director of the American Quaker-sponsored summer Camp McShannet for 70 French refugee children in the Alsace Lorraine region. In the fall of 1941, he went to Le Chambon in south central France, and spent almost four years establishing homes for refugee children, and hiding refugees. He worked with CIMAD (le Comité Inter-Movements Auprès des Evacuées), Secours Suisse aux Enfants, and the Red Cross. CIMAD liberated 16 young people from Gurs. In Le Chambon, August arranged for the local College Cevenol to provide educational opportunities for residents of his homes. One home named “L’Abrique” housed French Jewish children, among others. Another named “Faidoli” housed 40 to 50 children. In spring 1943, he opened an agricultural school. He helped protect about 200 children. Several times, August confronted Vichy administration representatives, but always succeeded in protecting the children. Once, he was threatened with detention unless he turned over 72 children. None was turned over; some were hidden in farm homes; and others were helped to get into Switzerland. He was never detained. Le Chambon residents were united in the rescue efforts. They were led by Pastor André Trocmé, who encouraged his congregation to maintain their basic values, even against government orders. The pastor occasionally “banged heads” with his church. August was honored as a Righteous Gentile by Yad Vashem in 1990, which also honored Le Chambon and the entire region, Le Plateau. [Source: USHMM Oral History]

Private papers of August Bohny-Reiter (1919-2016), a refugee aid worker and teacher. The collection consists of Bohny-Reiter biographical materials: photographs, records of civilian and military service, honors,and a diploma from Yad Vashem (1990); reports, correspondence, clippings, articles, publications and photographs relating to aid to refugees and refugee children in France and Switzerland, the founding of the Pestalozzi Children's Village, and cooperation with the Red Cross.