Chief of the Security Police and SD in the Occupied Soviet Baltic Territories (Riga)

Befehlshaber der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD in Riga (Fond 504)

5 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

5,218 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

Commanders of the Security Police and Security Service or Commander of the SiPo and SD ,or BdS were heads of a kind of RSHA field office from the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) in Nazi- occupied territories. Several "commanders of the security police and the SD" (KdS) were subordinated to a BdS. They had essentially the same tasks as the Einsatzkommandos. At the beginning of the Polish campaign in September 1939, first in the General Government for the occupied Polish territories , then in the other Rear Army Areas for "carrying out special security police duties outside the troops" Einsatzgruppen of the Security Police and SD (consisting of Einsatzkommandos or Sonderkommandos) corresponded to their structure to the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), so that they were also referred to as "mobile RSHA" or as "RSHA in small." In the areas of the occupied territories, where fighting had no longer taken place and the occupation administration had already been consolidated, the units of the Einsatzgruppen were transformed into stationary institutions for specific areas in which they performed tasks similar to those of the Reich Security Police . They were also-as previously the Einsatzgruppen-in addition to intelligence activities with "special treatments" (e.g. the murder) of the Jews involved. For each occupied country a commander of the security police and the SD (BdS) was used. Exceptions were only Alsace, Lorraine, the Warthegau, the Generalgouvernement and the Reichskommissariate " Ostland " and Ukraine , for each of which a separate BdS was ordered. At lower regional level several "commanders of the security police and the SD" were subordinated to the BdS. In the East, two "Reich Commissariats" were formed after the front had frozen in the winter of 1941-42: The Reichskommissariat Ostland and the Reichskommissariat Ukraine. [Source: "Wikipedia"]

The collection contains reports, German translations of documents, minutes, circulars, orders, reviews, secret publications, financial documents, correspondence, special bulletins, transcripts of testimonies, and various materials such as copies of documents and maps. Includes information on police activities against partisans and other resistance efforts in the Occupied Eastern Territories; the activities of Einsatzgruppe A; directives and instructions of Himmler and other senior police officials about the treatment of foreign workers; measures for their punishment; the treatment of Communist Party officials; documents created by resistance groups and CP organs that were captured by the Wehrmacht and SS; Schutzmannschaften activities; Jewish partisan activities; the slave labor of Jews, Soviet POWs, and others; the collaboration of Polish and other nationalist groups with Germans against the USSR; the transport and forced labor of Jews; the establishment and maintenance of camps and prisoners; the killing of Jews and others in forests; the Spanish Blue Division; Latvian and Dutch volunteers in German military units; and the general administration of occupied territories.