Executive Committee Vienna, "Judäa" Union of Jewish Students in Austria

Exekutive des Gesamtverbandes jüdischer Studenten Österreichs "Judeja", Vien (Fond 712)

1 microfilm reel (partial), 16 mm

157 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The Judeja (Judäa) Union of Jewish Students in Austria was funded in Vienna in February 1919. it was a nonpartisan organization representing the economic, cultural, and group interests of Jewish students in Austria.

The Zentralausschuss der Deutschen Juden für Hilfe und Aufbau coordinated economic and social assistance for German Jews from 1933/1938. The committee was created in 1933-04, just three months after Hitler rose to national power, as a collaboration of various German Jewish communal, political, and social-welfare organizations. Its goal was to take care of those Jews who had lost their jobs or businesses as a result of the Nazi’s anti-Jewish legislation. In addition, Jewish welfare organizations outside of Germany had requested the creation of such a committee to deal with all the monies being donated to help German Jewry.[Source: Encyclopedia of the Holocaust / R. Rozett, S. Spector. Jerusalem, 2006, p. 164]

Organization's information bulletins, as well as a May 1933 report of the statistical section of a Zionist organization in Berlin (Zentralausschuss der deutschen Juden für Hilfe und Aufbau), which argues against the claim that Jews were over-represented in institutions of higher learning. Also included are statistics on Jews by province, a monograph "Michel Ezofowicz" by S. Hirschfeld, and a list of books held by the Judeja Law Library in Vienna. There is also correspondence with Jewish student unions in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia on the calling of the First World Jewish Congress in Geneva, 1936 and Judeja representation as well preparation for the Second Congress, correspondence with Professor Sigmund Freud and D. Baumgarten on organizing lectures. Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.