Ministry of Public Administration in Warsaw

Ministerstwo Administracji Publicznej w Warszawie (Sygn. 199)

25,676 digital images, PDF

Archiwum Akt Nowych

Ministry of Public Administration was established on December 31 1944 as a result of the transformation of the Ministry of Public Administration of the Polish Committee of National Liberation in one of the ministries of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Polish. Ministry-continuing responsibilities predecessor-took essentially part of the competence of the pre-war Ministry of the Interior (but some tasks taken over by the newly created departments: public safety, information and propaganda, and the reconstruction of the central agencies (the Central Office of Measurements country and the Central Office of Control of the Press, Publications and Performances and Ministry of Religious Affairs and Public education (also with demarcation of tasks for the Ministry of Education). The Office took over the organizational structure of its predecessor managing seven departments (Organizational, Political, Local Government, Administrative, Religious, Registration and Control of Movement of People, Technology and Construction) and the Chief Inspectorate, Office of Military and Personal Office. In the following years only minor changes were implemented. The Ministry was liquidated on April 19 1950. And its powers taken over by the Ministry of Public Utilities and the Office for Religious Affairs.

Selected files from the following departments of the Ministry of Public Administration in Warsaw: The Cabinet of the Minister (Gabinet Ministra), Political Department (Departament Polityczny), Department of Administration and Law (Departament Administracyjno-Prawny), Department of Religious Denominations (Departament Wyznaniowy). The materials refer to: repatriation, the organization and activities of the Central Committee of Jews in Poland (CKŻP), Jewish political parties, organizations (e.g. Joint, Jewish Agency for Palestine, Polamit), statistical data and Jewish religious congregations, abandoned property and Jewish graveyards, war losses and war graves, ritual slaughter, and the maintenance and commemoration of killing centers (Auschwitz, Treblinka, Majdanek), and places of combat. This collection also includes records of the Polish Federation of former Political Prisoners of Concentration Camps, as well as situational reports related to the situation and safety of civilians after the war.