Trials of the German collaborators conducted after WWII on the territory of the Georgia SSR kept by the ex-KGB Archives

Postwar trials and investigations from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Republic of Georgia (Fond 6)

756,449 digital images, JPEG

Georgia (Republic). Šinagan sakʻmetʻa saministro.

The Narodnyy Komissariat Vnutrennikh Del (NKVD) formed in 1934 as was a law enforcement agency of the Soviet Union, contained the regular, public police force of the USSR, including traffic police, firefighting, border guards and archives. It is best known for the activities of the Gulag and the Main Directorate for State Security (GUGB), the predecessor of the KGB). The NKVD conducted mass extrajudicial executions, ran the Gulag system of forced labor camps and suppressed underground resistance, and was also responsible for mass deportations of entire nationalities and Kulaks to unpopulated regions of the country. It was also tasked with protection of Soviet borders and espionage, which included political assassinations abroad, influencing foreign governments and enforcing Stalinist policy within communist movements in other countries.

Ministerstvo Gosudarstvennoi Bezopasnosti (MGB) (Ministry of State Security) was the intelligence agency from 1946 to 1953. The MGB was one of many incarnations of the Soviet State Security apparatus.

Komitet gosudarstvennoy bezopasnosti (KGB) was the main security agency for the Soviet Union from 1954 until its collapse in 1991. The KGB was formed in 1954 and attached to the Council of Ministers, the committee was a direct successor of such preceding agencies as Cheka, NKGB, and MGB. It was the chief government agency of "union-republican jurisdiction", acting as internal security, intelligence, and secret police.

Criminal investigation files and records of trials of residents of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic accused of wartime crimes. It includes interrogation transcripts, witness statements, arrest warrants, sketches, diagrams, photographs, and other evidentiary documents related to suspected war criminals.