Weil and Wolf families papers

folders

4

Eric Weil (Erich, 1913-2001) was born in Mannheim, Germany to Max Weil and Jenny Weil (née Meyer) and had a sister Hannah. Max owned a liquor distillery. They lived in Mannheim and had a house in Switzerland and an apartment in France, but they sold the home in Switzerland after WWI. In the 1930s, the family fled Germany to their apartment in France and Eric joined the French Foreign Legion to avoid his parents being sent to an internment camp. Once the family received their visas they sailed on a Portuguese ship to the United States and settled in New York. Hannah married Hugo Neuhas and had a daughter, Evelyn. Hannah passed away in her mid-30s. Eric joined the military and was wounded while serving in WWII. He was awarded the Purple Heart. Eric met Anne Wolf (1922-2005) after the war and they had a daughter, Susan (b. 1949).

Anne Wolf (born Auguste Gusti Wolf, later Weil, 1922-2005) was born in Augsburg, Germany to Gustoff (Gustav) Wolf and Minna Wolf (née Grunbaum). Gustoff was a photographer and passed away before Anne was born. Minna owned a jewelry business and lived with her brother, Joseph Landmann, his wife, Regina, and their three children. At age 16, Anne left on a Kindertransport to London where she lived with a family and their two children. After bombings began is London, the mother and two children moved to the country while Anne stayed with father. Anne soon arranged to move out and live on her own with the help of a Jewish organization. She immigrated to the United States with the help of Joseph, who already lived in America with his wife and children. Once in the United States she corresponded with her mother until the outbreak of the war between the United States and Germany. She later learned through the Red Cross that her mother perished in Auschwitz. Anne met Eric Weil (1913-2001) after the war and they had a daughter, Susan (b. 1949).

The Weil and Wolf families papers include biographical material, correspondence, and photographs documenting the experiences of Eric Weil and Anne Wolf and their families' pre-war lives in Augsburg and Mannheim, Germany and their immigration to the United States. Biographical material includes a news clipping relating to Erich Weil’s service in the military, a letter from the U.S. military regarding Eric being awarded the Purple Heart, a deregistration form, birth certificates for Auguste (Anne) Wolf, Susan Weil, and Eric Weil, correspondence received from the Red Cross regarding the fate of Minna Wolf, and materials from Christie's auction house regarding the sale of a family painting. Correspondence includes wartime letters from Joseph Landmann, family correspondence from Augsburg, Germany, V-mail from Minna to Pfc Henry Landman, and letters from Minna in Germany to her children, including Henry and Joseph. Photographs include pre-war photographs of the Weil and Wolf families in Germany and the United States. Weil family photographs depict Eric, Jenny, Max, Hannalore, Max’s brother Morris, Walter, and Ellen in Mannheim, Germany before the war and In New York. Wolf family photographs depict Minna, Anne, Else, and Joseph, Regina, and Joan Landmann in Augsburg, Germany before the war as well as Anna and the Landmann family in New York after they immigrated to the United States in the late 1930s.