Drechsler family papers

boxes

oversize folders

2

2

Clara Drechsler (later Clara Kramer, 1908-1996) was born in Baltimore, Maryland in 1908 to Isidor and Anna Drechsler. Her father Isidor (1880-1942) was born in Trnava (present day Slovakia) to Bernhard and Adela (née Sidon) Drechsler. Her mother Anna (née Weiss, 1883-1942) was born in Szeged, Hungary to Bernard and Klara (née Pulitzer) Weiss. Isidor and Anna were immigrants from the Austro-Hungarian Empire who immigrated to the United States with their young son, Andor (b. 1905, also known as Bondi). Soon after Clara’s birth the family decided to return to Trnava. Clara’s younger siblings, twins Béla and Rose (later Rose Pogany, nicknamed Baby), were born in Trnava in 1917. Isidor was the proprietor of an iron foundry in the city. Clara graduated from the University of Prague Law School, but did not practice law. After the German-annexation of Czechoslovakia in 1938 the Drechsler family began to experience anti-Semitic persecution. Clara travelled to the United States to attend the World’s Fair in June 1939 aboard the SS Manhattan. After the outbreak of World War II, she was not able to return to Europe, and was already an American citizen by birth. At the time of Clara’s departure, her brother Andor lived in Hungary and her brother Bela served with the Czech Army in exile. Her parents and sister Rose remained in Trnava. Within months of arriving in United States Clara married Charles Kramer (1912-2004). The couple settled in New York and had two children: Agnes (b. 1940) and Stanford (b. 1944). Clara remained in regular correspondence with her family in Europe. The couple also sent material support to Clara’s family through the JDC. In 1940 Rose escaped Czechoslovakia to join her brother Andor in Hungary. The Drechsler children endeavored to aid their parents living under German-occupation in Trnava in the hopes that they too might be able to flee. In approximately April or June 1942 Isidor and Anna were deported to Auschwitz where they were killed. Andor and Rose survived the Holocaust in hiding as non-Jews. Bela went to Palestine and immigrated to the United States in 1948. Rose and her family fled Hungary during the 1956 revolution, later immigrating to the United States with her husband Gyuri Pogany.

Correspondence, photographs, and immigration papers documenting the Holocaust-era experiences of the Drechsler family of Trnava (present day Slovakia). The bulk of the collection consists of wartime letters sent to Clara Drechsler (later Clara Kramer) in the United States from her parents Isidor and Anna Drechsler and siblings Andor, Rose, and Bela in Trnava and elsewhere in Europe. Also included is a small amount of immigration paperwork, recipes, and prewar family photographs. Biographical material consists of a small amount of financial records, handwritten recipes, and immigration paperwork. The immigration papers include letters regarding affidavits and an undated letter from Isidor petitioning the HIAS for tickets to the United States. Correspondence primarily consists of letters to Clara sent from her family in Trnava, Budapest, and elsewhere in Europe. Also included are letters from friends and relatives in Slovakia and other parts of Europe. The bulk of the letters are from 1939-1941. Photographs include pre-war depictions of the Drechsler family including Bela Drechsler in his Free Czech Army uniform, Rose Drechsler and her husband Gyuri Pogany, and Clara Drechsler aboard the SS Manhattan en route to the United States in 1939.