Selected records from the Romanian Information Service

127,162 digital images, JPEG

274 microfilm reels, 16 mm

1 microfilm reel, 35 mm

Romania. Serviciul Român de Informaţii

Information on Silviu Brucan b. 1916, d. 2006; Married Alexandra Sidorovici; General prosecutor in the postwar trial of the Romanian war criminals. With his wife, a member of the Communist Antifascist Resistance movement in Romania. After the WW II, he was deputy editor in chief of Scinteia, newspaper of the Romanian Communist Party. He was the first Romanian ambassador to the U.S. and the U.N. in the 1950s. In the early 1960s, he was first director of Romanian television. A political scientist, in 1987 he became an opponent of the Ceaucescu regime. In 1987 he protested against the repression by the government against the workers strike in Brasov. In 1989, with U.S., British, and Soviet support, he published the "Letter of the Six." (Six former high-ranking Romanian Communist Party leaders). On 22 Dec 1989 he became a high-ranking official of the first Romanian post-Communist regime, having been directly involved in the execution of Ceaucescu and his wife, and in the arrest.

Reports, lists, orders, correspondence, court documents, and testimonies relating to the surveillance of Romanian Jews (including Chief Rabbi Moses David Rosen), Jewish organizations, foreigners in Romania, and members of the Iron Guard (Garde de Fier) by the Serviciul Special de Informatii and other agencies; the special taxes, forced labor, and morale of Jews; the establishment of the Czernowitz (Chernivt︠s︡i) ghetto; the deportation of Jews from Transylvania and other locations to Transnistria (Ukraine); the emigration of Jews from Romania to Palestine; Romanian Jews in concentration camps; massacres and pogroms carried out in Romania; the activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross and of other humanitarian agencies; war crime investigations; war crime trials of Ion Antonescu and others; and the surveillance of Zionists and other illegal Jewish organizations. Also contains information on Jews, includes card files, registration forms, and cards with the identification data for Jews. Some documents have photos of the individuals. Additional records accreted in 2007 contains the SRI's personal file on Silviu Brucan, who was a political scientist and Romanian government official. Formerly a deputy editor of the newspaper of the Romanian communist party, in 1987 he became an opponent of the Ceaucescu regime. Records accreted in 2015 contains: Interrogations of SSI leaders (Fond Penal): Eugen Cristescu (SRI FP/Bucuresti 48163-4 volumes); Gheorghe Cristescu (SRI FP/Bucuresti 17474-3 volumes)-Iasi pogrom, photos of pogrom, history of SgkSI, Iron Guards, Antonescu Ion Lissievici (SRI FP/Bucuresti 25374-36 volumes)-SSI, pogrom Iasi, SSI and Eastern Front.