Charles Burns collection

box

oversize folder

1

1

Charles Burns, a professional editor, served as the first and primary editor of Douglas Kelly's book,"22 Cells in Nuremberg."

Douglas McGlashan Kelley (1912-1958) was born on 11 August 1912 in Truckee, California to George and June Kelley. He graduated from Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons as a Doctor of Medical Science in 1941. He also worked with the Rorschach Institute as the chairman of the training committee. Douglas married Alice Vivienne Hill (1914-2007) in 1940, and they had three children: Doug, Alicia, and Allen. During World War II he served as chief psychiatrist with the 30th General Hospital. In 1945 he was assigned chief psychiatrist at Nuremberg Prison. Prior to the Nuremberg War Trials, he was charged with completing competency evaluations for the defendants, including the administration of the Rorschach test. Douglas was honorably discharged in 1946 with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. In 1947 he published the book 22 Cells in Nuremberg. The book details his psychiatric profiles of high ranking members of the Nazi party, including Rudolf Hess, Joachim von Ribbentrop, and Herman Göring. He was active in numerous medical associations, and was appointed Associate Professor of Psychiatry at Wake Forest College. Douglas died by suicide on 1 January 1958.

The Charles Burns collections contains two drafts of Douglas Kelley’s book, 22 Cells in Nuremberg. The book describes the psychological profiles of high ranking members of the Nazi party, who eventually stood trial at the Nuremberg War Trials. Douglas Kelley who was in charge of evaluating the defendants, writes of his experiences with the individuals. The drafts are heavily edited by Kelley’s editor, Charles Burns. Also included in this collection are some notes made by Charles Burns, a letter to other editors about the book, and some news clippings concerning notorious Nazi members. The Charles Burns collection contains two drafts of Douglas Kelley’s book, "22 Cells in Nuremberg." The book provides psychological profiles of high ranking members of the Nazi party, who eventually stood trial at the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials. Douglas Kelley, who was in charge of evaluating the defendants, writes of his experiences with these individuals. The drafts are heavily edited by Kelley’s editor, Charles Burns. Also included in this collection are some notes made by Charles Burns, a letter to other editors about the book, and some news clippings about various members of the Nazi party.