I'm An American Day 1941 -- I'm An American Day

On May 18, 1941 at 6:05PM, Edward Arnold participated in a special dramatic broadcast at the Hollywood Bowl in celebration of I’m An American Day. Host Art Baker opens the program explaining the purpose of the new holiday. The National Anthem is played by the LA WPA 75 piece orchestra and sung by John Charles Thomas, the LA City College 70 Voice A Capella Choir. 15,000 people are in attendance. 21-year-old Aileen Syral reads the invocation. Edward Arnold, President of the I’m An American Foundation, reads the Presidential Proclamation from Franklin D. Roosevelt declaring May 18 as I’m an American Day. "The Case of Robert: A Character Study" by Carlton E. Morse begins with 21-year-old Robert (voice of Jackie Cooper), who has just come of age, sitting at the defendant table in a court of law. He has been summoned to hear of testimony about his character on his birthday. The Judge (Edward Arnold) calls Robert’s neighbor, boss, friend, girlfriend, mother, and father to testify. All of the witnesses vouch for Robert’s ideals and character. Robert’s father reveals that summoning his son to court was his idea because men are allowed to slip into manhood and citizenship unnoticed. The court welcomes Robert as an adult U.S. citizen without privileges. Robert replies to the ruling by saying, “It’s the most important day of my life”. The scene closes with the Judge reminding Robert that citizenship is sacred. America the Beautiful is played. The radio broadcast continues with the Los Angeles Mayor and LA County Supervisor addressing the audience in support of democracy and tolerance. The LA WPA 75 piece orchestra, the LA City College 70 Voice A Capella Choir and John Charles Thomas play "I Hear America Singing" intertwined with poems by Walt Whitman. Ben Neal, Founder and Honorary President of the I’m an American Foundation, references the motion picture industry's support in the program. The President of the Motion Picture Association, Wyatt Frank Freeman, talks about the power of films in fostering knowledge and understanding; as well as its influence on the thoughts and habits of viewers. The special I’m an American Day broadcast closes with 15,000 people reciting the American Creed.