Manfred Lewinnek papers

boxes

4

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum

Manfred Lewinnek was born on October 11, 1913, in Berlin, Germany, to Adolf, born 1873, and Lina Aron Lewinnek, born 1882. Manfred later lived in Stuttgart. In June 1938, he immigrated to the United States. His parents remained behind in Buttenhausen and Manfred pursued ways to obtain visas to get them out of Nazi Germany, including visa applications under the Polish quota and attempts to raise funds for ship tickets and/or visas. He received a letter, dated November 18, 1944, from the U.S. Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service stating that his parents’ petition for immigration has been approved. But Adolf and Lina had been deported to Izbica, Poland, on April 26, 1942. It is likely that they perished in Belzec or Sobibor killing centers or were executed for the mass graves near Izbica in 1943. In 1942, Manfred was inducted into the United States Army, and by 1944, he was stationed at the United States Army Prisoner of War Camp Cooke in California. Manfred's primary duty at Camp Cooke from March 1945 to November 1945 was to re-educate German prisoners-of-war. Manfred passed way, age 70, in 1983.

Collection of documents and correspondence concerning Manfred Lewinnek's emigration from Germany and his experiences during WWII while stationed as a member of the US Army in POW Camp Cooke in California, where he was responsible for the "re-education" of German POWs. Includes journals written by Lewinnek in German and English, spanning August 1938 through January 1942 [one undated journal from circa 1942]. Also includes correspondence received by Mr. Lewinnek primarily from his parents in Buttenhausen, Germany; correspondence regarding his efforts to secure visas for his parents, who were not able to flee Nazi Germany; a set of "re-education" publications, questionnaires, and summaries of surveys conducted with German prisoners of war in the United States. As early as 1939, documents attest to Manfred’s attempts to find some route out for his parents, including visa applications under the Polish quota, attempts to raise funds for ship tickets for his parents and/or purchase them which were all met with disappointment. One such letter, received from the U.S. Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service states his parents’ petition for immigration has been approved. It is dated November 18, 1944. Adolf and Lina Lewinnek were deported from Buttenhausen, Germany to Izbica, Poland on April 26, 1942. It is likely that they perished in Belzec or Sobibor killing centers or executed in mass graves near Izbica in 1943.