Fonds FSJF-après-guerre (MDLXXXIV). Fédération des Sociétés Juives de France

14,199 digital images, JPEG

Mémorial de la Shoah, Centre de Documentation Juive Contemporaine

The Federation of Jewish Societies of France (FSJF) was founded in Paris between 1923 and 1926 with the aim of bringing together dozens of immigrant Jewish societies. From the 1930s onwards, the FSJF was recognized as the main representative of Jews who had immigrated to France. Included among its leaders were Israel Jefroykin, Marc Jarblum, Claude Kelman, Judah Jacoubovitch and Reuven Grinberg. The Federation administrated several assistance services to Jewish immigrants (food, financial and legal aid). The Federation also promoted a wealth of cultural activities (a popular university, a library, Yiddish and Hebrew courses, playful and friendly clubs). During the Second World War, the FSJF developed canteens and clinics for the many foreign Jews; In 1940 FSJF co-founded the Comité de la rue Amelot. In the free zone, it subsidized 18 regional committees and 3 major central organizations. Its leaders were among the founders of the CDJC and the CRIF in 1943. Several of its members engage in armed resistance, joining military organizations in the south of France. At the end of the war, the Federation participated in the founding of the Fondation Casip-Cojasor (COJASOR). In 1951 FSJF inaugurated a house for the survivors of the Shoah at the Château de Boissise-la-Bertrand (Seine-Et-Marne), and a summer camp for children from needy families. In 1953, FSJF created "Kehila" to meet the demands of traditional religious members and Zionist movement. The Federation also promotes several actions in favor of the State of Israel. The Federation runs committees working for the memory of the Shoah in France. In addition, its cultural commission, popular university and publishing house "Kiyoum" (renamed "Unzer Kiyoum") is committed to the preservation of the Yiddish language and culture. In 1981 the Jewish Center for Art and Culture "Israel Jefroykin" was inaugurated in the premises of 68, rue de la Folie-Méricourt (Paris, XIe).

Records of the Fédération des Sociétés Juives de France (Federation of Jewish Charities in France) FSJF: Correspondence, reports, minutes, leaflets, cultural programs, press articles related to socio-legal assistance for Jewish survivors and the needy, commitment to the memory of the Shoah, support for the State of Israel, promotion of Yiddish language and the renewal of Jewish culture in France.