Julius Goldstein papers

boxes

4

Colonel Julius Goldstein (1907-2001) was born in the United States to naturalized Jewish immigrants. He served with the 64th Fighter Wing in Italy, France, and Germany from 1942-1946 and visited Dachau two days after its liberation.

The Julius Goldstein papers consist of correspondence, personnel files, photographs, printed materials, and a scrapbook documenting Goldstein’s military service with the 64th Fighter Wing in Italy, France, and Germany during World War II and his visit to the Dachau concentration camp two days after the camp’s liberation. 64th Fighter Wing correspondence includes memoranda documenting missions, actions, and procedures of the 64th Fighter Wing. This series also includes four letters from Julius Goldstein to his wife dated May 1945 that describe his visit to the Dachau concentration camp two days following its liberation and his opinions on the complicity of German civilians in World War II and the Holocaust. Additional records documenting the 64th Fighter Wing can be found in the scrapbook. Julius Goldstein’s personnel file primarily consists of orders but also includes medical records, memoranda, reports, forms, and authorizations documenting Goldstein’s movements, accomplishments, promotions, awards, and commendations during World War II. Additional personnel records documenting Goldstein’s military career can be found in the scrapbook. Two loose photographic portraits depict Julius Goldstein during training and overseas. Many more photographs can be found in the scrapbook. Printed materials include reports, histories, brochures, and newspapers documenting Julius Goldstein, the 64th Fighter Wing, the war’s progress, the Holocaust, and Holocaust survivors. Additional printed materials can be found in the scrapbook. The scrapbook includes photographs, clippings, personnel records, currency and scrip, pins, patches, ribbons, awards, and commendations documenting Goldstein’s military training, arrival in Italy via North Africa, and wartime experiences in European cities including Foggia, Naples, St. Tropez, Dole, Dijon, Ludres, Sacy, Nancy, Paris, Kaiserslautern, Mannheim, Ludwigshafen, Heidelberg, Dachau, Augsburg, and Darmstadt. Photographs depict Goldstein, his wife and daughters, fellow soldiers, Bob Hope, the Maginot and Siegfried lines, wartime destruction, women tarred and feathered in St. Tropez, battlefield cemeteries, and the Dachau concentration camp. Pins include a captain pin, a golden oak leaf emblem, a silver oak leaf emblem, and a silver airplane featuring a quote from Hermann Göring. Patches include a Wehrmacht breast eagle emblem, a Nazi Kriegsmarine officer Breast Eagle, a XII Tactical Air Command patch, and a XV Army Corps patch. Ribbons include a bit of purple ribbon from a Legion of Merit award, a bit of red ribbon from a Bronze Star, and a European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign ribbon bar with five stars. Currency and scrip include a 50 centimes note from Algeria and Allied Military Authority scrip from Italy and Germany. The scrapbook also contains a red armband with a black swastika.