Marianne Joachim letters

folder

1

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum

Marianne Prager (1921-1943) was born to construction worker Georg Prager and Jenny Prager and grew up in Berlin. After finishing secondary school, she became a nanny at the Jewish Children's Home on Gipsstraße in Berlin. Prager was conscripted into forced labor in 1940 in Rathenow. On August 22, 1941, she married Heinz Joachim (1919-1942) in Berlin. At that time she worked as a forced laborer at the Alfred Teves factory in Berlin-Wittenau. After her husband met Herbert Baum in the electric motor factory of the Siemens company, the couple joined Baum's anti-Fascist resistance group. The couple's apartment on Rykestraße often served as a meeting place for the group. On 18 May 1942, this group launched an attack on an anti-Communist propaganda exhibition. Marianne and her husband were arrested the same year, Heinz was executed on 18 August 1942, and Marianne was executed on 4 March 1943 in Berlin-Plötzensee. The same month, her mother was deported to Auschwitz and her father to Theresienstadt, and both were killed. Marianne’s sister, Ilse, was able to escape on one of the last Kindertransports to England. Heinz Joachim’s father Alfons, died at the end of 1944 at the concentration camp Sachsenhausen.

The Marianne Joachim letters include four letters Joachim wrote to her parents from prison before her execution for anti-fascist activities. In the letters Joachim writes about her own and her parents’ health, her father’s work, toiletries she requested, her pleasure at her parents’ visits and letters, her relief that her parents’ deportation (“evacuation”) was postponed, her activities in prison, spending the holidays in prison, and her lawyer. She tries to remain optimistic and to keep her parents optimistic too. In her last letter, she bids farewell to her parents, begs them to remain strong, and sends them her love. Translations of the letters can be found in the finding aid for the collection.