US Foreign Service and diplomats; Good Neighbor Policy; recall of ambassador from Germany

March of Time, Vol. 5, No. 4 (continuation of "The Foreign Service") Ambassadors at work abroad: Joseph P. Kennedy in London; William C. Bullitt in Paris (the "listening post for all of Europe"); George Wadsworth in Jerusalem; Joseph C. Grew in Japan; Nelson T. Johnson in China. The Jerusalem footage shows British soldiers, Jewish colonists, and an Arab man being frisked by a soldier. The narration says that the British government has had to send more soldiers to quell Arab attacks on Jews, most of whom are refugees already fleeing persecution. Title on screen: "No more vital problem faces the U.S. State Department today, than developing the friendship of the nation's next-door neighbors." Scenes in the State Department's Division of the American Republics, where "the President's Good Neighbor policy is being vigorously pushed." Scenes of South America (cattle, wheat, city view) while the narrator talks of the importance of the region's markets and resources. However, these markets have already been "invaded by nations whose dictator-controlled economies challenge all competition." Shots of Japanese, Italian, and German ships and goods in South American harbors. Herm. Stolz and Co. shop, which carries German goods such as cameras and binoculars. Close-up of the Spanish-language edition of Mein Kampf. Airplanes which belong to a German-owned airline sit on an airfield. Brazil's President Getulio Vargas, who outlawed Nazism when he learned that "Nazi organizers and agents are building up storm troop organizations among German colonists." Back in Washington, Under Secretary of State Sumner Welles is "interviewed" about the importance of solidarity between North and South America. Shots of one of the refitted luxury liners that was part of the "Good Neighbor Fleet" that sailed between New York and the east coast of South America. Crowds of people on the ship and waving from the pier. Shots of the presidents of Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil (Roberto Ortiz, Alfredo Baldomir, and Getulio Vargas). Title on screen: "In the art of diplomacy, nothing is more essential than measuring words and gauging moves -- particularly in critical times." Secretary Hull makes a radio address as the "world crisis of 1938" develops. Journalists typing in a newsroom. Newspaper headline reads U.S. ORDERS OUR AMBASSADOR TO GERMANY HOME. Photo of Cordell Hull in a German newspaper.