Ciechanowiecki and Miller families photograph collection

folder

1

Hinka Miller (1915-2012) was born in Warsaw, Poland to Gitl Modrikamien and Nuta Miller. She had at least two brothers, and was married with children prior to World War II. Around 1942, Hinka and one of her brothers were put on a train going to Treblinka concentration camp. They jumped out of the train and were able to escape. Through the help of Polish neighbors, they were able to remain hidden for the duration of the war. After the war, Hinka went to Łódź, Poland where she met Chaim Ciechanowiecki. They soon married, and Chaim and his brother Lejzer briefly operated a shoe repair store before continued persecution forced all three to leave Łódź. The ended up in the displaced persons camp in Cremona, Italy. Chaim and Hinka's daughter, Enia, was born in the camp in 1946. In 1948, Chaim, Hinka, Enia, and Lejzer all immigrated to Argentinia. Enia would later immigrate to Montreal, Canada, and bring her parents there. Hinka's first husband, children, and parents all perished during the Holocaust.

Chaim Yaakov Ciechanowiecki (1911-1994) was born in Stoczek, Poland to Enia (née Sznaidman) and Saul Isaac Ciechanowiecki. He had at least one brother, Lejzer Ciechanowiecki (1909-1987). Chaim was married with children when World War II started. Following the German occupatin of Poland, he and his brother were taken to the Treblinka concentration camp around 1942. They worked in the shoe workshop until they escaped into the nearby forest. Chaim and Lejzer lived there in hiding until the Red Army liberated that area in 1945, and then they went to Łódź, Poland. Chaim met and married Hinka Miller there, and the brothers opened a shoe repair store. Continued anti-Semitic persecution in Łódź forced Chaim, Hinka, and Lejzer to eventually leave, and they ended up at the displaced persons camp in Cremona, Italy. Chaim and Hinka's daughter, Enia, was born in the DP camp in 1946. In 1948, they immigrated to Argentina. Decades later, Enia immigrated to Montreal, Canada, and eventually brought her parents over. Chaim's first wife, children, and parents all perished during the Holocaust.

The collection contains prewar photographs of Chaim Yaakov Ciechanowiecki and Hinka Miller, and their families in Poland; postwar photographs in a displaced persons camp in Cremona, Italy; and modern color photographs of family members.