Blam and Selinger family papers

folders

5

The Blam and Selinger families consist of Golda and Hersch Blam, their daughter, Machcia Selinger, Machcia’s son, Oleg Selinger, and others. In 1942, during the time of Nazi occupation, the Blam family lived in the Drohobycz Ghetto in Poland (now Drohobych, Ukraine) and the Selingers lived in Sambor, Poland (now Sambir, Ukraine). Golda and Hersch eventually perished in Belzec extermination camp or were shot in the Bronicki forest near Drohobycz, sometime in late 1942 or 1943 when all Jews living in Drohobycz were murdered. Machcia and Oleg survived the Holocaust.

The Blam and Selinger families consist of Golda and Hersch Blam, their daughter, Machcia Selinger, Machcia’s son, Oleg Selinger, and others. In 1942, during the time of Nazi occupation, the Blam family lived in the Drohobycz Ghetto in Poland (now Drohobych, Ukraine) and the Selingers lived in Sambor, Poland (now Sambir, Ukraine). Golda and Hersch eventually perished in Belzec extermination camp or were shot in the Bronicki forest near Drohobycz, sometime in late 1942 or 1943 when all Jews living in Drohobycz were murdered. Machcia and Oleg survived the Holocaust.

The Blam and Selinger family papers consists primarily of correspondence in the form of postcards from Golda and Hersch Blam to their family, presumably their daughter, Machcia in Sambor. One postcard in the collection is from Toni (?) Selinger to Machcia. The postcards were written during a five month period between June and October of 1942, a time period when most of the Jews from the Drohobycz ghetto were transported to the Belzec extermination camp. Most of the postcards relate family news and concerns for each other’s health and wellbeing. Mention of food shortages and a lack of adequate clothing for Oleg is made in a couple of the postcards. Also included are three undated family photographs depicting Golda, Hersch, Oleg, and Machcia and a map of the Warsaw ghetto’s borders between 1940 and 1942.