Selected records from the General State Archives in Volos (GAK Magnesia)

127,308 digital images, JPEG

Genika Archeia tou Kratous. Archeia Nomou Magnisias

The collection includes selected archival materials from four record groups: 1. Judical Archives: Special Court for Criminal Cases of Local Collaborators in the Volos area (Thessaly region) who committed crimes against the civilian population in the former Italian and German zones of occupation during the Second World. This collection contains court proceedings and verdicts against local collaborators; Court of First Instance in Volos (Political department). It contains court minutes and judicial records related to compensation payments to victims of Nazi persecution during World War II, includes the court cases of Holocaust survivors, as well as Jews who have lost their relatives, applied for monetary compensation for losses of personal property and assets under the occupation; 2. Administrative Archives: Includes archival records concerning Jewish enterprises in Volos from the archives of the Department of Industry of the Prefecture of Magnesia, and records of the Special Commission on the Recognition of the Participants of the National Resistance (1941-1944) during WWII. It contains written testimonies of resistance fighters, including a large number of former Jewish partisans; 3. Archival records of the sanatorium "Ē Zōodochos Pēgē" established in the Pillion Mountains by Dr. Georgios Karamanis. It contains correspondence between the sanatorium administration Jewish Distribution Committee (Joint) representative office in Athens and the Jewish Community of Thessaloniki (1946-1947), personal and financial records of Jewish Holocaust survivors who were treated at the sanatorium after the war with the financial assistance provided by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee; 4. Archive of the Children's Shelter of Volos (1922-1996). It contains minutes the Board of Directors, correspondence, activity reports, and children's registry.