Rev. Stanley Dabrowski papers

folders

oversize folder

14

1

Reverend Stanley Dabrowski (1913-1995) was born Stanislaw P. Dabrowski in Warsaw, Poland to Wladyslaw Dabrowski and Antonina Zagorski. He had a brother and a sister and attended high school and early college in Grudziądz. After a brief time of military service, he entered the seminary in Włocławek for the Diocese of Wladislaviensis. In November 1939 along with the faculty and other students in the seminary, Rev. Dabrowski was arrested by the Gestapo while watching over the chancery one evening. He and 400 others from his diocese were imprisoned first at Sachsenhausen and in December 1940, transferred to Dachau. Rev. Dabrowski remained detained in Dachau with other priests until the camp was liberated by the United States Army in April 1945. After liberation, Rev. Dabrowski worked among other Poles in exile in Paris and taught classes in religious education. In July 1945 Rev. Dabrowski was ordained a priest for the Diocese of Wladislaviensis by the Archbishop of Paris. In 1946, Rev. Dabrowski obtained a visa for the United States and traveled aboard victory ship Frederick H. Rattjer to New York City. He ultimately settled in Milwaukee, Wisconsin after visiting family there and finding a job with the Ss. Cyril and Methodius parish, where he lived and worked for 14 years. During this time, Rev. Dabrowski was incardinated into the Archdiocese of Milwaukee. Rev. Dabrowski also served the St. Hyacinth parish, which was his last parochial assignment, as he then became chaplain of St. Francis Hospital until his retirement in 1970. Rev. Dabrowski passed away in 1995 in Milwaukee.

The Reverend Stanley Dabrowski collection contains documents concerning Reverend Stanley Dabrowski, a Polish Catholic priest who was arrested by the Gestapo in 1939 and detained at Dachau until he was liberated in 1945. This collection consists of original documents concerning Reverend Dabrowski’s life and biographical background from pre and post-war Europe and materials he collected regarding the Holocaust and Dachau once he arrived in the United States. Among his original documents is a Polish passport, identification cards, his ship passage ticket to the United States, and correspondence which includes a letter he wrote in Dachau to a family member in 1944. Among his collected material are newspaper clippings, photographs of the Dachau Memorial Museum, and postcards depicting martyrs from the Polish clergy in the Second World War.