Schifferes family papers

boxes

oversize boxes

document rolls

2

2

1

Liese Strauss Schifferes (1916-1956) was born in Vienna to Dr. Hugo Strauss and Sophie Kurz Strauss. She immigrated to the United States in November 1938. Stephan Schifferes (1909-2004) was born in Vienna to Julius Schifferes (1878-1913) and Bertha Schifferes (nee Schifferes, 1885-1964). He lived and worked in Stuttgart in 1938, spent several weeks in Dachau following Kristallnacht, moved to England in 1939 on a training permit, and immigrated to the United States that August. Liese and Stephan were married immediately, changed their name to Shiffers and had two daughters, Eva and Judy. Stephan Schifferes’ grandmother, Ottilie Siebenschein, belonged to a longstanding and property-owning family in Vienna.

The Schifferes family papers consist of correspondence, emigration and immigration records, and subject files documenting the lives of Bertha, Liese, and Stephan Schifferes in Austria, Germany, England, and the United States and property belonging to Stephan Schifferes’ relatives, the Siebenschein family, in Vienna. Bertha Schifferes materials consist of correspondence with relatives, friends, and her son’s family; employment records; and identification papers documenting her departure from Vienna, stay in England, and immigration to the United States. Liese Schifferes materials consist of correspondence with her husband and other family members and friends as well as education, training, and employment records documenting her education in Austria and Italy and her immigration to the United States. Stephan Schifferes materials include an account book; correspondence with his wife, mother, daughter, and other family members and friends; education, training, and employment records; and identification and membership papers documenting his emigration from Austria, stay in England, immigration to the United States, and efforts to find work. This series also includes Schifferes’ personal narratives about his Holocaust‐era experiences and records documenting his participation in and leadership of athletic activities in Vienna and his time in Stuttgart in 1938 and 1939. Emigration and immigration records include correspondence documenting the Schifferes’ interactions with government offices, aid organizations, and transportation and shipping companies as they prepared for emigration from Austria and immigrated to the United States. These files include documents from the Geheime Staatspolizei describing Stephan Schifferes’ release from so‐called “protective custody” in Dachau on the condition that he emigrate immediately. Subject files include general correspondence, notes, poetry, an unidentified photograph, printed materials, and receipts further illustrating the Schifferes’ experiences in Austria, England, and the United States. This series also includes files documenting two relatives of the Schifferes family, Alfred and Stefanie Kurz, and research into Bloomsbury House in London. Siebenschein family property records consist of photocopies of original records dating from 1939‐1962 documenting the Nazi‐era expropriation of the Siebenschein’s Vienna property and the family’s efforts to reclaim it and rebuild after the war. The property was referred to as parcels 36, 37, and 38 and corresponded to four addresses: Schwendergasse 25, Dadlergasse 20, Dadlergasse 22, and Schwendergasse 27. The property had been evenly shared between Raphael and Siegmund Siebenschein until Siegmund Siebenschein’s half was divided among his heirs: Irma Siebenschein, Robert Siebenschein, and Rosalia Siebenschein Schneck. Records include photocopies of correspondence, court records, land registries, and forms.