I'm An American -- Pitirim Sorokin

On December 21, 1941 Dr. Pitirim Sorokin spoke with Henry Nichols, of the Boston Immigration and Naturalization Service, about the responsibilities of being an American citizen. The author of "Crisis of Our Age" declares Americans were unaware of how close they were to an international Holocaust until the news broke today. He describes the American spirit as the ability to confront crisis without fear or emotional loyalty. Dr. Sorokin says the country has changed in two weeks from a peaceful nation extending a helping hand to one preparing for war. He shares how he emigrated from Russia and started his career in America. The professor declares mankind is in a state of emergency. He believes this is true because Hitler is a threat to democracy, the dignity of man and sacredness of life. Dr. Sorokin suggests heroic action as the way to help Europe and avoid the same situation on American soil. He also suggests ways in which America can become invincible. The professor ends the segment by declaring duty and sacrifice to the individual makes everyone's life full and worth living. Dr. Sorokin adds nations that have used this philosophy were successful at getting through difficult times while others failed. Pitirim Sorokin (b. Pitirim Alexandrovich Sorokin) was born on January 21, 1889 in Turya, Russia. When Sorokin was three-years-old, his mother passed and his family split up. He and his brother worked as itinerant artisans wandering the Komi homelands. When Sorokin was 14, he joined an organized resistance against the Czar. Because of his quick mind and love of ideas, the aspiring sociologist won a series of competitive scholarships that eventually paid for his college education. Dr. Sorokin earned his Magistrant of Criminal Law and PhD degrees by 1922. He had also been jailed six times for political defiance. Nevertheless, he advanced politically and academically by founding the first sociology department at the University of St. Petersburg. Dr. Sorokin was also a secretary in the post-Czarist government. In 1924, he immigrated to America and found employment at the University of Minnesota. He wrote six books in six years, with four of them defining the field of sociology at the time. Dr. Sorokin went on to become the chair of Harvard’s first Department of Sociology, serving for three decades.