Pinchas Paul Hendel family papers

folder

1

Pinchas Hendel was born on July 1, 1914, in Hrubieszow, Poland, to a Jewish couple, Moshe Aron (Nuchim Moszko Aron) and Soshe Rachel (Sosia Ruchla, Jente) Finger Hendel. He had three siblings: Joseph, Izak, and Keile Taube. Pinchas’s paternal family was most likely Russian and his grandmother lived in Krasnograd (later Krasnohrad, Ukraine). His mother Soshe Rachel was born to Szaja and Jenta (Sara Rifka) Rauch Finger. She had a sister, Mania, and a brother, Leib, born on December 25, 1882, in Hrubieszow. Pinchas’s brother Joseph emigrated to New York circa 1920. His sister Keile Taube married Israel Blander and had two children, Jentle and Basha. Germany invaded Poland on September 1, 1939. German troops occupied Hrubieszow, located just west of the Bug River, on September 14. They handed it over to Soviet forces on September 17 to comply with the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, an agreement signed August 23, 1939, in which Germany and the Soviet Union divided Poland. Germany claimed all territory west of the Vistula River, which was west of Hrubieszow in central Poland. On September 29, the dividing line was changed and Germany was given all territory west of the Bug River. The Germans reoccupied Hrubieszow on October 3. As the Soviets retreated, many young Jewish men fled eastward to Soviet occupied territory. Pinchas went to Wlodzimierz Wolynski (Volodymyr-Volynskyi, Ukraine) in eastern Poland. In 1940, Pinchas was in territory occupied by the Soviet Union. On June 22, 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union and occupied eastern Poland. Germany surrendered to the Allied nations on May 7, 1945, and to the Soviet Union on May 9. From August 1945 to April 1946, Pinchas was in Glatz, Poland. In May, he went to Ebensee, Austria. Pinchas’s maternal uncle Leib also had survived the war in the Soviet Union. On August 28, 1946, Pinchas and Leib were in Heilbronn displaced persons camp in Germany. In November, Pinchas and Leib moved to Hasenhecke dp camp in Kassel, Germany. Pinchas corresponded with his brother Joseph, who lived in Brooklyn. Pinchas later lived in Ulm dp camp, then Wasseralfingen dp camp. He worked for the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration [UNRRA.] On September 29, 1949, Pinchas married Karrin (Christina) Knies (1927-2006), who was born in Worms, Germany, to Johannes and Anna Kuhling Knies. In October 1949, Pinchas’s uncle Leib left for New York. On December 1, 1950, Pinchas and Christina sailed from Bremerhaven on the USNS General M.B. Stewart, arriving in New York on December 12. The Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society [HIAS] sponsored their emigration. They settled in Brooklyn and lived with Leib. They became naturalized American citizens in 1956 and changed their first names to Paul and Karen. They had a daughter. Most of Pinchas’s family perished in the Holocaust, including his parents, his brother Izak, his brother-in-law Israel, and his nieces Jentle and Basha. Leib’s wife, Mala, and children, Szlama and Rachela, were killed in 1942. Paul’s uncle Leib, age 83, died in May 1966. Paul, age 92, died on March 19, 2007.

The collection includes photographs and correspondence relating to the Hendel family in Hrubieszów, Poland, identification cards, documents and pamphlets relating to immigration and naturalization, and an X-ray of Pinchas Paul from displaced persons camp.