I'm An American -- Jean Hersholt

On April 27, 1941 Jean Hersholt spoke with William H. Carmichael, District Director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, about why he’s proud to be an American. Hersholt shares his family’s immigration story. He reveals his native land is democratic but not the same as America because Europe is constantly on the brink of war. Hersholt shares some of the changes he’s seen in Europe since the Nazis have come to power. He warns listeners to keep democracy and the constitution current with the times of today. Hersholt champions youth citizenship. The segment ends with the actor and film industry humanitarian recalling a conversation he had with President Roosevelt. Jean Hersholt (b. Jean Pierre Carl Büron) was born on July 12, 1886 in Copenhagen, Denmark. He grew up in Denmark and toured theaters throughout Europe with his performer parents. When he was 20, he had already appeared in two Danish films. In 1913, he emigrated to the U.S. and began his American film career as an extra. In the 1920s, Hersholt became one of the film industry’s most prolific actors. He was cast as the lead villain in many films, including Erich von Stroheim’s classic “Greed.” When “talkies” were introduced, he overcame his strong Danish accent by becoming a character actor (known for applying his own makeup) in films such as “The Mask of Fu Manchu,” “Grand Hotel,” and “Heidi." In 1938, he became president of the Motion Picture Relief Fund, an organization that provided financial support and other services for motion picture industry employees. The Fund's efforts were recognized in 1939 with an honorary Academy Award. Hersholt lead the effort to create the Motion Picture Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California. From 1945 to 1949, Hersholt deepened his relationship with the Academy by serving as its president. It was during his tenure that the Hollywood studios stopped financing the annual awards ceremony, and Hersholt fought to keep the organization thriving. When Hersholt died on June 2, 1956 from cancer, the Academy established the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award.