Der Sieg des Glaubens: Der film vom Reichsparteitag der NSDAP

overall: Height: 11.500 inches (29.21 cm) | Width: 8.750 inches (22.225 cm)

The souvenir program was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 2010 by Seth Goldberg.

Hans Schweitzer (1901-1980) was born in Berlin, and joined the Nazi party in 1926. As a member of the party, Schwietzer created cartoons, caricatures, and political posters under the penname, Mjölnir. He worked for several Nazi newspapers, including the Völkischer Beobachter (The People’s Observer) and a paper published by early Nazi leaders Gregor and Otto Strasser. With his artistic talents, Schweitzer advanced through the party. He was appointed as an honorary member of the SS and became friends with Joseph Goebbels, Reich Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda. Later, Schweitzer illustrated several books for Goebbels, including Die Verfluchten Hakenkreuzen, published in 1930. Throughout the 1930s, Schweitzer created images for Nazi antisemitic, political, and election posters. He was also a cartoonist for the paper Der Angriff (The Attack), publish by Goebbels, and illustrated the book, Kampf um Berlin (Fight for Berlin). In 1935, he was appointed as Representative for Artistic Design and worked in conjunction with the Ministry of Propaganda for the creation of exhibitions, erection of monuments, and the development of insignia and national symbols. Later, he worked with a commission to decide how to utilize artwork stolen from Nazi victims. Schweitzer was arrested by American authorities in 1947 and fined 500 deutsche marks for his actions during the Holocaust. In 1955, he had his Nazi record expunged and was able to work as an illustrator and teacher.

Eight page illustrated souvenir program for the Nazi propaganda film, Der Sieg des Glaubens [Victory of the Faith], a documentary film of the Fifth Party Congress of the Nazi Party, directed by Leni Riefenstahl. Held in September 1933, it as known as the Rally of Victory, and was the first Rally held after Hitler's appointment as Chancellor of Germany on January 30, 1933. It was also the first rally filmed by Riefenstahl, whose film of the next rally, Triumph of the Will, was a visually stunning, propaganda masterwork glorifying Hitler and the Nazi Party. The booklet features images of Hitler and other Nazi Party leaders, including Joseph Goebbels, Hermann Goering, and Ernst Rohm. SA chief Rohm was killed the next year in the purge known as the Night of the Long Knives, and Hitler ordered this film destroyed.