Hoess and others arriving in Warsaw for trial; snapshots from Germany

The Welt im Film [World in Film] newsreel series was produced by the American and British military governments to support the denazification campaign in Germany and Austria. Screening was compulsory in cinemas in the American and British zones of Germany until the late 1940s.

Welt im Film. Issue no. 60 Title: Vor dem Warschauer Prozess: Ankunft der Hauptangeklagten [Before the Warsaw trial: arrival of the main defendants]. Nazi defendants disembark from a plane under guard by Polish soldiers. The narrator says that they are guilty of countless crimes against justice and humanity. Some of the men are made to stand posed for the camera as they are identified: Josef Buehler, Hans Frank's deputy in Poland; Ludwig Leist, mayor of Warsaw; Jaeger, the police president of Posen, Beckmann, former head of the Krakow Gestapo; Polnikow, head of the Posen Gestapo, Daume, representative of the German government in Poland, and Rudolf Hoess, commandant of Auschwitz and "responsible for 3 million deaths." The accused climb onto an open truck. Shot of the truck arriving at the courthouse in Warsaw. 02:08:46 Title: Streiflichter aus Deutschland [Spotlight on Germany?]. American soldiers teach German children how to play baseball at an athletic field in Tempelhof. Children are shown how to throw and catch. A baseball game in action. 02:09:42 Title: Bildbericht aus Westerland [Film report from Westerland]. Men in uniform repair the sea wall protecting the north sea island Sylf in Westerland. They blow up the crumbled remains of the damaged wall and dump new sand onto the beach. A shot of the newly repaired wall is followed by scenes of children frolicking on the beach and in the waves. The children are patients at the children's home of Dr. Ross and they receive six weeks at the beach in order to aid their health. The children are shown eating a hot meal, courtesy of a Swedish charity. More shots of children and adults, some of whom are patients of the spa, enjoying the sun and the beach.