Bernard Frum papers

folders

oversize folders

document tube

5

2

1

Bernard Frum (b. Bernhard, 1914-1975) was born in Berlin, Germany to Gershon (1878-c.1944) and Lea Frum (née Polinkowsky, 1877-c.1944) and had two brothers, Alexander and Edward. In 1939 Bernard fled Germany for Shanghai, China. His wife, Lucy (also Lucie, née Herrmann, 1906-c.1996) who was not Jewish, joined Bernard a couple of months later and they married in Shanghai in 1939. Bernard’s brother, Alexander, lived in the United States and helped sponsor Bernard and Lucy’s immigration to America. In 1946, Bernard was granted a medical visa and Lucy was granted permission to come with him. Both of Bernard’s parents perished during the war.

The Bernard Frum papers include biographical material, a diary, and immigration documents relating to Bernard Frum and his wife Lucy Frum’s escape from Germany to Shanghai during the Holocaust as well as wartime correspondence between Bernard and his parents and brother, Alexander. The collection also includes pre-war documents relating to Bernard’s musical career and his family’s property. Biographical materials include a marriage certificate, curriculum vitae, and a resident card from Shanghai. Correspondence consists mainly of wartime letters from Bernard’s parents to Bernard about life in Germany and Shanghai, asking about their son, Alexander, updating Bernard on their effort to leave Germany, information on friends and family, and requests for permits to Shanghai after they were forced to leave Germany as well as several letters from Bernard to his parents about his health and wellbeing. This series also includes a post-war letter from his brother, Alexander, about the fate of their family and friends during the Holocaust, worries about Bernhard’s health, and offers to bring Bernhard to the United States. The diary was written by Bernard and Lucy and documents their personal struggles, goals, and ideas as well as their political ideas for re-building Germany and re-structuring the government after the war, Bernard’s attempts to explain himself to his wife and her answers, a short description of his parents' personalities, and a description of the day Bernard and Lucy were due to arrive in Shanghai. Immigration material includes applications, correspondence from the American Consulate regarding their application status, and a document describing the immigration of Bernard and Lucy. Pre-war documents include letters from the Reichs Music Chamber informing Bernard of the condition of members for German composers and of his expulsion from the organization, an application for the enrollment of non-Aryans into the “Reichsmusikerschaft,” an order for Bernard to attend a military inspection, and a document indicating the Frum family’s legal position regarding their common property.