Dulberg family papers

box

oversize folder

1

1

Leiser Dulberg (later Louis, 1893-1982) was born in Rymanów, Poland in 1893. In 1925, he married Sara Jakubowicz, who was also born in Rymanów in 1893. Together, Louis and Sara had three children, Hermann Leopold (1919-1979), Moshe, and Fanny. In 1937, Hermann Leopold traveled to the United States aboard the M.S. Pilsudski to study engineering at Stevens College in New Jersey. Two years later, Louis traveled to the United States aboard the same vessel to New York City, where he stayed with his son and worked as a laborer. When the war broke out, Louis remained in the United States and tried to obtain visas for his wife and other children to join him. His efforts were unsuccessful and Sara, Moshe, and Fanny perished in the Holocaust. After the war, Louis met and married Esther Suna Feldman, who had also traveled to the United States from Poland and lost her husband and two children during the Holocaust. They had two children together, Loretta and Jeffrey. Louis lived in Dade County, Florida until his death in 1982.

Esther Suna (1906-1997) was born on May 16, 1906. Prior to the war, she married Moshe Feldman and had two children, Bella and Henry. The family lived in Łódź, Poland. Esther had many family members, including her parents, in the United States. In 1939, Esther obtained a Visa to visit her family in Brooklyn, New York, with the plan of working to get Moshe, Bella, and Henry to join her. She was unsuccessful in her efforts, and her husband and children perished in the Holocaust. After the war, Esther married Louis Dulberg who was also living in New York City at the time and had lost his family during the Holocaust. Together, they had two children together, Loretta and Jeffrey. Esther resided in Dade County, Florida until her death in 1997.

The Dulberg family papers contain documents and photographs related to Louis and Esther Dulberg’s families in the years before and after the Holocaust. Included in the collection are several documents pertaining to Louis’ immigration. Among them, copies of his birth certificate, Polish identification cards, correspondence regarding his Visa application, and affidavits affirming his Polish military service and nationality. The photographs contain images of Esther’s first husband, Moshe and their children, Bella and Henry, and Louis’ first wife, Sara and their three children. Also included are several photographs of the Dulberg family in post-war years dating up to 1983.