David Siegel papers

box

oversize box

1

1

David Siegel (1909-2004) was born and raised in Toronto. Prior to World War II, he worked as a middle school teacher in England. David enlisted in the Canadian Air Force in 1940 and served four years in Europe as a radar technician. After the war, Siegel joined the immigration department of the Canadian civil service, and in 1948 was asked to serve as the liaison between the Canadian Jewish Congress (CJC) and Canadian immigration to facilitate immigration of Jewish displaced persons to Canada. David served in Europe in 1948 and 1949, visiting various displaced persons camps in Germany, Austria, and Italy. His main duties revolved around helping to expedite the processing of immigrants, finding relatives or designated people and help them qualify for immigration to Canada, and provide the CJC with advance information on families proceeding to Canada for adequate preparations were made for their reception. After his time in Europe with the CJC, David Siegel became a synagogue administrator.

The David Siegel papers document Siegel’s time working for the Canadian Jewish Congress (CJC), serving as a liaison to the Canadian immigration department, assisting with Jewish displaced persons from 1948-1949. Included in the records are documents from Siegel’s time with the CJC, such as his diary, address book, and travel documents. In addition, a photograph album documents Siegel’s travels across Europe. The biography series contains Siegel’s reflections on his time with the CJC, both in written responses to questions via mail, and an historical narrative that Siegel gave that broke down his day-to-day activities with the CJC. Also included are personal items that Siegel kept, including some event programs and news clippings concerning displaced persons after World War II. The David Siegel papers contain mainly items from Siegel’s time with the Canadian Jewish Congress (CJC), for which he served as a liaison for the Canadian immigration department in 1948-1949. This includes a diary Siegel kept during his time in Europe, a photo album, an address book, and other notes and travel documents. The diary documents Siegel’s activities, while his photograph album shows the places he visited and the people he helped. The biography series contains material created by Siegel well after his time with the CJC, in which he reflects on his time there and details his activities. Included are responses to questions Siegel received via mail, and a narrative history in which Siegel gives detailed accounts of day-to-day duties. In the personal items series are some news clippings from 1983 about Jewish organizations and displacement camps, and also some event programs from Siegel’s college graduation and from a play he performed in.