Remembrance ceremonies for Heydrich in Prague, Brno, Plzen, and Tabor

Official Czech newsreel folowing the assassination of Heydrich. The Czech government proclaims their loyalty to the Germans in a remembrance ceremony. “Cesky ZVUKOVÝ TÝDENÍK” “Prag-Praha” “KTULIA AKTUALITÀ” Church of Our Lady Before Tyn in Prague - a mass demonstration in Old Town Square on June 2, 1942. Stage with Czech coat of arms. Crowd. Astronomical Clock Tower. People stand and sit on the Jan Hus Memorial. The square is packed. German officials walk towards the grandstand. Around 60,000 people have gathered in the square (the German minority in Prague was significant). Aerial view. Dr. Krejči, chairman of the government, begins speaking. More views of the dense crowd, CUs. Spokesman of the youth, Dr. Teuner, at the podium. Polish coat of arms in BG. Uniformed officials stand at the front of the crowd.“ASTORCH SYA” on fresco in BG. Aerial view of the demonstration. Minister of War Emanuel Moravec takes the podium, three microphones in front of him. Faces of men and women in the crowd. WS of Moravec at the podium with German officials. Crowd applauds, Czech anthem. Men salute. Crowd responds. Intertitle, “Böhmen und Mähren Cechy a Morava.” INT, workers salute. Men walk through the crowd. Officers salute. Minister of transport and technology, Dr. Kaménický, on stage. View through the spokes of a wheel. ECU of men’s faces as they watch speaker. Crowd. Workers lean against the locomotive in work attire. Audience claps, some salute. Numbers on the arch above the speaker’s podium: “543051.” Work-master Faifrlik joins stage. Dr. Kaménický salutes the crowd. Men salute back. Cathedral of St. Peter and Paul in Brünn on June 12, 1942. “MÄHRISCHES LANDES-MUSEUM.” Crowd in the Zelný trh (Vegetable Market) square. Large stage with Nazi flags in middle of this crowd. Parnas fountain. Men, women and children watch from behind a rope. Minister Moravec begins his speech. Photographer. People surround the Parnas fountain. Old Town Hall Clock tower in Brno. Crowd watches and salutes, Czech national anthem. “Böhmen und Mähren Čechy a Morava.” Another demonstration after the assassination in Pilsen's main square. Nazi flags. Stage with Nazi officials. More than 60,000 have gathered in the square. People watch from rooftops. The minister Emanuel Moravec gives his speech. Moravec salutes, and everyone in the crowd salutes in response. Czech national anthem. Street scenes in Tabor. Statue n front of a clock tower in the BG. Men in uniform march through the street. Everyone gathers in a square. Dr. Krečjiho, chairman of the government takes the stage. Young women in matching dresses clap. National Theatre actor Jiri Dohnal reads manifest. Emil Hácha, president of Czechoslovakia takes the stage. CU of Hácha as he gives his speech. Aerial view of the crowd. A clocktower. The audience focuses on Hácha’s speech. He salutes, and exits the stage. The young women clap again. The minister of agriculture and forestry Hrubý addresses the audience. WS of crowd and the buildings around the square. Hrubý finishes his speech with a salute. Moravec speask. He salutes, and speaks emphatically. The crowd salutes back, Czech national anthem, Nazi salute.