Soviet Lviv, Ukraine

Narration identifies Lvov (Lwow, Poland, Lviv, Ukraine). City views. There are shots of extravagant mansions juxtaposed with shots of run-down shacks, as well as small houses of higher quality. Workers move into new apartments; one pastes a poster of Stalin to his wall. Trams, many driven, as noted by the narrator, by women. One passes a monument to Adam Mickiewicz, the great Polish poet. Candy factory. Moving (panning and tracking) shots through market streets, high angles, extensive coverage. Shots of monuments, church and monks (appears to be a monastery), police officers. 00:45:01 Woman, formerly jail prisoner, now a judge. 00:45:18 BRIGYDKI prison. Good view with windows. Scene of a massacre. This became a NKVD prison. Building: Academy of Science. VS, University. More city scenes, woman at typewriter, Polish writer Wanda Wasilevska. Three men with ladder, walking along street. Conservatory: orchestra playing. Opera. Street scenes, cars, police. High wide angle pan of the city. Soviet flag flying. Translation of narration: Lvov - one of the oldest Ukrainian* cities. (see Notes field) The red flag in the city was raised on September 22, 1939. City center where the richest people - bank employees, merchants, and factory owners - lived. They introduced themselves brilliantly, when settling in these houses, "Beware, angry dog!" [The sign on a fence reads in Polish "Beware, angry dog"] Earl Potocki's residence. And this is the house of the worker Waice's family. The Soviet authority resettled approximately ten thousand workers' families into the houses of run- away Polish landlords in the center of the city. This is a factory that once belonged to the millionaire Brank. A former factory employee comrade Kuzmitskaya is now deputy director and a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of Ukraine. Never before has Lvov seen a woman operating a streetcar. Iryna Stechyna became a skilled and experienced driver. Streets of the native city lie open before the eyes of another driver Sofiya Boretskaya. A monument to the poet-genius Adam Mickiewicz. Some of the oldest parts of the city: Rynok (Market) Square, a house built in 1557 and known as "Chorna Kam'yanytsya" [the Black stone house]. A 17th century Bernardin Church. In the bright sunshine these dark passing shadows are seen much better [Allusions to monks and the church as the dark institution while the Soviet rule brings light.] And these are the shadows that are gone forever. The actors who play Polish swaggering officers in a new movie "Dream" that speaks about the life of workers in Poland. Director Mikhail Romm is behind the camera. Friends whose lives underwent crucial changes. We are at Lvov city court. Soviet judges Mire, Malygina, and Synts. They were entrusted to render justice in the city. One of the judges, Mirre, spent three and a half years imprisoned in Poland. She was accused in underground Komsomol activity and sentenced to 13 years. Ernerstina Bernbaum was imprisoned in the #112 prison cell. Sunrays would never touch these obscure walls. Lvov belongs to us! It is Soviet! Now and forever the red flag, the flag of our Homeland, is raised in this dear Ukrainian city! Ancient fortifications. They saw Bogdan Khmelnitskiy fighting against the Polish landlords so that the people of Ukraine could be united together.