Book burning; Hitler & high Nazi officials

Frank Capra was an Italian American film director, producer, and writer born in Italy and raised in Los Angeles from the age of five. Capra became one of America's most influential directors during the 1930s, winning three Academy Awards for Best Director from six nominations, along with three other Oscar wins from nine nominations in other categories. Among his leading films were "It Happened One Night" (1934), "You Can't Take It with You" (1938), and "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" (1939). Capra served in the US Army during World War I and became naturalized shortly thereafter. He reenlisted after Pearl Harbor and was offered a commission as a Major at the age of 44. Chief of Staff George Marshall bypassed the US Army Signal Corps and assigned Major Capra the job of producing seven propaganda films (the Why We Fight series) that would be seen less as propaganda pieces and more as the inspiring films that Capra had made. After World War II, Capra's career declined as his later films, such as "It's a Wonderful Life" (1946), performed poorly when they were first released. Outside of directing, Capra was active in the film industry, engaging in various political and social issues. He served as President of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, worked alongside the Writers Guild of America, and was head of the Directors Guild of America.

Propaganda film about the background of World War II (Orientation Film No. 1). Opening shot, AV Hoover Dam. CUs of New York Times newspaper headlines regarding The League of Nations, Tariff Act, Isolationism and Prohibition. Narrator compares free democratic system to the Nazi regime. 01:30:28 Books freely read in USA, including Mein Kampf. 01:30:34 Scenes of German bookburnings in Berlin. Optical mix of flames with CUs of banned books, including Heinrich Heine, Remarque, Hemingway, Thomas Mann, and Mendelssohn music, to 01:30:54 . EXT of a Gothic style church, INT of Church, boys choir singing "Onward, Christian Soldiers," slow pan, CUs of the faces of the young boys singing. VS of American children playing outdoors on jungle gyms, drawing, painting, in the classroom, in the schoolyard, playing ball, skating, biking, etc. VS of German and Japanese children playing war games. Japan sequence: 01:32:47 to 01:33:22. "German" youth in gas masks crawling through the grass in a field, presumably in "training" for their futures as Nazi soldiers. CU of Hitler and high ranking officials in military procession in Germany. Similar shots of military processions with Mussolini in Italy and with Hirohito in Japan. CUs of Hess, Goering, Frank, Dietrich, Todt, Reinhardt, Darre and Ley at podium. VSs of crowds rallying behind their leaders in Italy, Germany and Japan. VSs of animated maps describing each country's desired annexations, etc. In the end the map of the world is covered in swastikas and the Rising Sun.