The Striker, Number 16, April 1937, 15th year 1937

Der St端rmer, Nummer 16, April 1937, 15 Jahr 1937

The newspaper was donated to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in 2016 by the Katz Family.

The Katz Ehrenthal Collection is a collection of more than 900 objects depicting Jews and antisemitic and anti-Jewish propaganda from the medieval to the modern era, in Europe, Russia, and the United States. The collection was amassed by Peter Ehrenthal, a Romanian Holocaust survivor, to document the pervasive history of anti-Jewish hatred in Western art, politics and popular culture. It includes crude folk art as well as pieces created by Europe's finest craftsmen, prints and periodical illustrations, posters, paintings, decorative art, and toys and everyday household items decorated with depictions of stereotypical Jewish figures.

Julius Streicher was the founder of "Der St端rmer" and Gauleiter of Franconia. He was sentenced to death at the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg. [Encyclopedia of the Holocaust. Vol. 3-4. New York: MacMillan Publishing Company, 1995, pp. 1788.]

April 1937 isue of Der St端rmer, [The Stormtrooper], a viciously anti-Jewish newspaper published by Julius Streicher, an early Nazi Party member, from 1923-1945 in Germany. The headline reads: Istjuden, Die schleichen sich in Deutschland ein [The Jews, who sneak into Germany] with an illustration of a sneaky looking Jewish businessmen and an angry German, captioned Betrogen [Deceived.] The newspaper's slogan was "Die Juden sind unser Ungl端ck!" [The Jews are our misfortune]. The paper thrived on scandal, and preferred sensational stories of Jews committing disgusting, evil acts. It was also infamous for its antisemitic cartoons and staff cartoonist Fips. Streicher was arrested by the US Army in May 1945. He was tried by the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, convicted, and executed per the ruling that his repeated articles calling for the annihilation of the Jewish race were a direct incitement to murder and a crime against humanity. The newspaper is one of the more than 900 items in the Katz Ehrenthal Collection of antisemitic artifacts and visual materials.