Correspondence and related records regarding the Jewish Restitution Successor organization

box

1

Benjamin B. Ferencz was born in Șomcuta Mare, Romania (Nagysomkút, Hungary) on March 11, 1920, to Joseph and Sarah Ferencz. At the time, Șomcuta Mare was still part of Hungary but was occupied by Romania. The city was ceded to Romania under the Treaty of Trianon shortly after Benjamin’s birth, and the Ferencz family immigrated to the United States at the end of the same year. Benjamin Ferencz received a Bachelor of Science in Social Science from the City College of New York in 1940, and a law degree from Harvard Law School in 1943. Mr. Ferencz served in the U.S. Army from 1943-1945 and then held a variety of positions related to the Holocaust. Some of those positions included Executive Counsel, Office of the Chief of Counsel for War Crimes, Nuremberg, 1946-1948; Chief Prosecutor for the U.S. in the war crimes trial against Nazi extermination squads, 1947; Director General, Jewish Restitution Successor Organization, 1948-1956; Director of Operations, United Restitution Organization, Ltd., 1954-1956; Special Legal Advisor at Hague reparations negotiations, Germany-Israel, 1952; Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, 1953-1956; Counsel, International Council of B'nai B'rith, 1958-1961; Counsel, American Oeuvre de Secours aux Enfants, 1959-1961; and numerous other councils and conferences related to the Holocaust. He held the position of Adjunct Professor of International Law at Pace University in White Plains, NY, and is founder and Executive Director of the Peace Center. Ferencz is the author of numerous monographs, articles, and commentaries, primarily on matters of international law, the need for an international criminal court, and world peace. Mr. Ferencz married Gertrude Ferencz (née Fried) in 1946, and is father to four children; Carol, Robin, Donald, and Nina. Mr. Ferencz resides in New Rochelle, New York where he continues to strive for universal peace.

The series consists of correspondence related to the the Jewish Restitution Successor Organization. Primarily, the correspondence deal with internal J.R.S.O. matters, such as funding and operations budgets. The series includes materials detailing the disposition of the desecrated Jewish cemetery at Fulda, Germany, and Ferencz's efforts to arrive at a solution that violated neither civil nor Talmudic law. Also included in the series is the court decision of J.R.S.O. vs. Augsburg, a case concerning the destruction of 800 synagogues in Bavaria and Hesse, Germany, and the resulting obligations for restitution.