Fried and Faktor family papers

box

1

Ann Fried Buchsbaum was born on 30 April 1923 in Vienna, Austria as Anni Fried, the daughter of Bernard (Judka) Fried and Laura (née Dickmann) Fried. Her father was originally from Russia, and worked in Vienna for a shoe manufacturer, while her mother, who worked as a milliner, had come from Stanisławow, Poland (present-day Ivano-Frankivsk, Ukraine). At the age of 15, and following the German annexation of Austria, the Frieds were able to send their daughter to live in the Netherlands in December 1938, with the help of a family friend. For most of the next year, she lived in “Huis Overvoorde,” a dormitory for girls from the ages of 4 to 16, in Rijswijk, near The Hague. A committee of women oversaw the dormitory, including Ruth Warburg Neu, a clinical psychologist and counselor. While living there, Ann, being one of the older girls, worked as a housekeeper, and also travelled repeatedly to the United States consulate in Rotterdam, seeking a visa, which she eventually obtained. In August 1939, she left Europe, setting sail on the Ile-de-France, and upon arrival in New York, went to live with the family of her father’s brother, Abraham Fried, in the Bronx. Shortly after her arrival, she met another refugee from Austria, Walter Buchsbaum, who she eventually married in 1944, while he was serving in the U.S. Army. The Buchsbaums had one son, Robert (born 1950), and settled in Queens. Shortly after Ann left Vienna, her parents divorced, and were able to emigrate, with Laura travelling to London, where she worked as a maid, and Bernard to Palestine. It was in London that Laura met Alois Faktor, an émigré from Czechoslovakia who was serving in that country’s government-in-exile, and they married around 1940. Following the war, they returned to Czechoslovakia, living in Prague, before immigrating to Canada (although Laura had tried to immigrate to the United States), where they lived the remainder of their lives. Bernard also remarried, and died in Israel in 1950, without Ann ever having seen him following her own emigration in 1938. The remaining members of Laura’s family who stayed in Austria were murdered during the Holocaust, including Laura’s brother and Ann’s uncle, Julius Dickmann, the noted Marxist political theoretician, to whom Ann was especially close. Dickmann, who was deported to Belzec in 1942, sent Ann several postcards describing his experiences in Vienna in the months leading up to his deportation.

Laura (née Dickmann) Fried met Alois Faktor, an émigré from Prague, Czechoslovakia who was serving in that country’s government-in-exile, in London, and they married around 1940. Following the war, they lived in first in Prague and then immigrated to Canada.

The Fried and Faktor families papers consist of biographical materials and photographs documenting Ann Fried Buchsbaum, originally of Vienna, Austria; her parents, Bernard (Judka) Fried and Laura Dickmann Fried Faktor; and her stepfather, Alois (Lou) Faktor, originally of Prague, and his family. The records are chiefly related to their lives in prewar Vienna, their efforts to leave Austria following German annexation, Ann’s time at a children’s dormitory in Holland (1938-1939), and Laura and Alois’ time in London and Prague. Also included are photographs of Ann’s husband, Walter Buchsbaum, a refugee from Vienna, who served in the U.S. Army during World War II, and photographs of the Faktor family farm. Biographical materials consist primarily of identification and immigration papers such as travel documents, passports, and notices of application for visas documenting Ann Fried Buchsbaum, Laura and Alois Faktor, and Bernard Fried. Also included are memorial books used by Alois Faktor’s family in the early 1900s, a letter documenting the deportations of some of Alois Faktor’s relatives, and two postcards from Ruth Neu, one of the women who ran the dormitory where Ann lived in the Netherlands. The photographs consist largely of images of Ann Fried Buchsbaum’s childhood in Vienna, of her parents during that period, and of Laura and Alois Faktor in London and Czechoslovakia in the 1940s. Also included are 10 images of Ann and other children of Huis Overvoorde. Images of the families of Laura and Alois Faktor and the Faktor family farm are also included.