Aussenstelle Dahlwitz-Hoppegarten records : Records ZC

329,343 digital images, JPEG

942 microfilm reels (partially digitized), 35 mm

Bundesarchiv (Germany)

The Ministry for State Security, (German: Ministerium für Staatssicherheit), commonly known as the “Stasi” was the official secret police of East Germany. The Ministry for State Security was headquartered in East Berlin, with an extensive complex in Berlin-Lichtenberg and several smaller facilities throughout the city. It was widely regarded as one of the most effective and repressive intelligence and secret police agencies in the world. Its motto was "Schild und Schwert der Partei" (Shield and Sword of the Party), showing its connections to the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED), the equivalent to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Another term used in earlier years to refer to the Ministry for State Security was Staatssicherheitsdienst (State Security Service or SSD). The Bundesarchiv branch at Dahlwitz-Hoppegarten, located in a suburb close to Berlin in the former East Germany, is currently a holder of the Nazi judicial collections from the period 1933-1945, which have only recently become available to research. The sub-Collection ZC offers insight into the persecution by the Nazi courts of individuals accused of “Rassenschande” (racial defilement), “Hochverrat” (high treason), “Verstoß gegen das Heimtückegesetz” (violation of the treachery law) and other political infractions. The overall number of pages of this sub-collection ZC of the "Nazi"-collections of the former Head Division [HA] IX/11 of the Ministry of State Security (Stasi) of the GDR is an estimated 1 million pages.

Files collected by the former East German Ministry of State Security Service (Stasi), including Nazi prosecutions for "Rassenschande" (racial defilement), "Hochverrat" (high treason), "Verstoß gegen das Heimtückegesetz"(violation of the "treachery law) and other political infractions. Files ZC 10859-ZC 12137 contains the missing part to the record group of the Reichs Ministry of Justice at the Federal Archive Berlin. The overall number of pages of this sub-collection ZC of the "Nazi"-collections of the former Head Division [HA] IX/11 of the Ministry of State Security (Stasi) of the GDR is an estimated 1 million pages.