Jewish Youth Group, "Berith Trumpeldor," Vienna

Jüdischer Jugendverein "Berith Trumpeldor", Wien (Fond 715)

2 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

410 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The Austrian section of the Brit Joseph Trumpeldor (Betar) was funded in December 1926 as a branch of Betar, the international youth organization of revisionist Zionists, headed from its inception by Vladimir Jabotinsky. Betar’s ideology stressed that the only solution to the Jewish question was the creation of the Jewish state in Palestine on both banks of the Jordan River. Toward this end, they prepared for settlement activity and trained in the use of weapons to defend Jewish settlements in Palestine. The Austrian “ken” (nest) was headed by E. Wolf and Otto Seidman. The Betar section in Gratz, which is often mentioned in the collection’s files, was led by B. Fleising. The organization was of paramilitary nature, structured on the principle of strict hierarchical subordination. An important aspect of Betar’s activity in Austria was creation of Youth Camps where organization members engaged in agricultural work and military training.

The entire Fond 715, 1929-1938 (45 Dela) contains organization’s charts, correspondence with local leadership, circulars, orders and reports. Includes lists of members and their military trainings. Majority of collection comprises of correspondence with Betar divisions in Germany and with Zionist organizations: Jewish Youth Front of Austria, Jewish State Party, Keren Tel Chai, Brit Hakana’im, Mizrachi of Austria; the Jewish academic organization Bar-Giora and Caritas, the Revisionist Zionist Party, Betar Hatzair, Maccabee, Betar of Yugoslavia, Betar of Czechoslovakia, The Union of Jewish War veterans, the Jewish National Youth Organization, the Revisionist Zionist Land Union, Hechalutz, HaLeumi, Hechalutz, hatzioni Hakalali, Chalutz Mizrachi, Brit Hahayal, Hakhsharra Kibbutzit, the Jewish State Party of Brazil, the youth section of Otzar Hanoar, the Zionist Organization, and Haganah. Selected records consists of organizational bylaws; meeting minutes; financial reports; Trumpeldor monthly reports; name lists of members; correspondence with organizations including the Graz police, B'nai B'rith in Graz and Vienna, Austrian Jewish Boy Scouts, and World Zionist Revisionists; and basic Hebrew vocabulary used by Trumpeldor. Note: USHMM Archives holds only selected records.