Trial of Reichstag fire-setters; art exhibition; French POWs

Deulig Film or Deutsche Lichtbild-Gesellschaft was a German film production and distribution company. It was established in 1916 by the German business tycoon and media mogul Alfred Hugenberg. The company's foundation, during the First World War, was intended to promote Germany's military cause but it also supported the commercial interests of several major industrial companies who backed the enterprise. The company developed a reputation for the production of short propaganda films and kulturfilms but also released feature films. In response to the company's success several rival industrial firms in alliance with the Deutsche Bank founded their own film company UFA in 1917, which in the decade that followed became Germany largest film enterprise. In 1927 when Hugenberg launched a successful takeover bid for UFA, the two companies merged. Deulig continued to release newsreels but was otherwise swallowed into the larger UFA conglomerate.

05:03:07 Title: "Verhandlung gegen die Reichstags-Brandstifter am Tatort. Senatspraesident Dr. Buenger eroeffnet im Hauptausschuss-Saal des Reichstages die Sitzung." Berlin. Reichstag building, dome, meeting room. The accused Reichstag fire-setters entering courtroom, public standing. Chief Judge Dr. Buenger (president of the Senate) presides over the trial (original sound). LS Reichstag. Proceedings continue, including listening to accusation and hearing evidence. Good lighting contrasts. Judge in formal robe. Spectators. Witnesses are admonished by Buenger (speaking for a long time). 05:05:47 Rhein, near Duesseldorf. The Italian art exhibition "1933 Westfront" "von Rheinisch-westfaelischen Kuenstlern unter Schirmherrschaft von Reichsminister Dr. Goebbels, veranstaltet" [Westphalian artists under patronage of Reichsminister Goebbels]. This was one of the last modern art exhibits. 05:06:16 France. Barges on the Rhine. 660 French POWs gathered at the port, loaded into boat, going to a POW camp after evacuation. The narrator speaks about the hot climate.