International Executive Committee of the International Union Against Racism and Antisemitism

Comité Exécutif International du Rassemblement mondial contra le racisme et anti-sémitisme, Paris (Fond 99)

4 microfilm reels (partial), 16 mm

6,975 digital images, JPEG

Rossiĭskiĭ gosudarstvennyĭ voennyĭ arkhiv

The International League against Racism and Antisemitism (La Ligue internationale contre le racisme et l'antisémitisme (LICA) was founded in 1928 in Paris by Bernard Lecache and Pierre Parf. LICA is one of the oldest antiracism associations in the world. In 1934, its members numbered 8-10,000, and in 1938, 32,000. LICRA was the organization that took the most radical positions with regard to French and German antisemitism. Its representatives engaged street clashes with anti-Semitic groups and boycotted firms that did businesses with the Nazi Germany. LICA rejected the “policy of silence” practiced by the Consistory and other leading Jewish organizations. Beside individual members, the league included 60 institutional members; political parties, unions, and other organization that participated in its activities.

Contains records on the structure of the International Union (IU) including lists of members of organizations of the IU's French committee, executive committee members, and delegates of the 1st Congress (International Congress against Racism); records on demonstrations against racist propaganda; meeting minutes of the executive committee of the IU; reports, papers, and speeches presented at the IU's first three international conferences, held in 1937, 1938, and 1939; correspondence with affiliated organizations, foreign consulates, and embassies. The collection also includes informational bulletins of the World Union, leaflets, e.g. protesting Germany’s occupation of Czechoslovakia; and an appeal to fight racism and antisemitism, an address to the League of Nations demanding that the rights of Jews living in Romania must be defended; copies of newspapers and journals; surveys of the press regarding persecutions of Jews in various countries, and other materials. Note: The entire collection was copied.