Ziegler family papers

box

1

Isaak Ziegler was born on 15 July 1890 in Bóbrka, Poland (Bóbrka, Ukraine). Frieda Ziegler was born Frieda Wind on 29 January 1901 in Bóbrka to Fischl Nussbaum and Feige Wind. Isaak and Frieda married and lived in Bóbrka. Their son Joseph (1925-1944) was born on 15 January 1925. Their daughter Frances (1930-2002) was born on 28 January 1930. After the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, the Ziegler family was moved into the Bóbrka ghetto in July 1941. In March 1943 the family escaped before the ghetto was liquidated. They were hidden in a farm cellar in Lanki (Luka, Ukraine) by the Kuchmistrz family. While in hiding, Joseph went out to forage for food and caught a cold. He died two days before liberation in summer 1944. After liberation, the family was taken to the Föhrenwald Displaced Persons camp. Frances resumed school at a Gymnasium in Munich, Germany. Her parents both enrolled in ORT training classes. The Ziegler family immigrated to the United States in April 1949 aboard the USS General Langfit. Józef and Anna Kuchmistrz, along with their children Kazimierz and Olga, hid nine Jews in their cellar during the war. They were named Righteous Among the Nations by Yad Vashem in 1990.

The collection documents the Holocaust-era experiences of the Ziegler family, originally of Bóbrka, Poland (Bóbrka, Ukraine), including their time spend hidden in a cellar on a farm in Lanki, Poland, post-war life in the Föhrenwald displaced persons camp, and their immigration to the United States in 1949. Included are documents, photographs, a notebook, and scrip from the Łódź ghetto. Documents include pre-war records such identification papers, a report card, and a marriage certificate and Ketubah; a certificate from the Bóbrka Landkommissar allowing the Ziegler family to live outside of the Bóbrka ghetto; post-war documents from the Föhrenwald DP camp, ORT papers, immigration paperwork, and reparations documents. Photographs include pre-war depictions of the family in Bóbrka, and post-war depictions in Föhrenwald and the United States. Also included is a notebook with textile patterns belonging to Frieda Ziegler used while studying in the ORT program in Föhrenwald.